# Angry! Praise Funds That Dump Facebook Over Transparency
(2018-07-06, [dev.to](https://dev.to/lethargilistic/angry-praise-funds-that-dump-facebook-over-transparency-ohd))

[Mark Gilbert's article in Bloomberg
Opinion](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-06-22/dislike-sustainable-fund-says-dump-facebook)
is framed as a practical evaluation of [Nordea Funds asset manager Sasja
Beslik](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-04-05/facebook-has-become-a-pandora-s-box-of-risks-for-nordea-funds)'s
decision to divest his fund of Facebook shares. Gilbert is probably far more
qualified to write something like that than an unemployed software engineer,
but the actual article has virtually nothing to do with the decision. Instead,
it is a screed trying to justify the indefensible: profiteering off of
Facebook's unethical lack of transparency and disregard for users rights that
lead to scandals including Cambridge-Analytica.

If Gilbert sees divesting Facebook as an "unjustifiable overreaction," he's
probably rolling his eyes at that description of his piece. You shouldn't.
Facebook's 2014 policies, lax to the point of insanity, exposed millions of
non-consenting people’s data to third parties, of which Cambridge-Analytica is
but one. This company’s short history is riddled with similar scandals.
Although it is [habitually
apologetic](https://www.wired.com/story/why-zuckerberg-15-year-apology-tour-hasnt-fixed-facebook),
Facebook has shown no indication of company-wide change that is anything more
than a [minimum response to the
scrutiny](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-43494337) or [begrudgingly
implementing new regulations like the
GPDR](https://www.theregister.co.uk/2018/05/29/facebook_messages_trick/). The
grain of truth in Gilbert’s article grows around the fact that those responses
came to government scrutiny and government regulation. It’s clear that the
industry will at least take steps after that attention, though it’s also
evident that Facebook will drag its feet all that way.

Then Gilbert proceeds to completely disregard the fundamental thing companies
do respond to: Money. When he does mention it, it’s to say that Beslik’s 3.6
million Euros is not enough to make a dent in Facebook’s 580,000 million US
Dollars. We’re supposed to believe that a fund divesting itself of Facebook
because of ethical concerns and lack of transparency is insignificant because
the money it pulled out was a drop in a sea? The article actively discourages
others from following suit even though more funds pulling out has a cumulative
effect. And why? Because Gilbert doesn’t think the ethical hazards of
mishandling data compare to the ethical hazards of *destroying the Earth?*
Extraordinary.

First of all, Facebook didn’t have to threaten the end of life on Earth to make
itself a deadly serious issue, and it has a vested interest in changing human
social moors about acceptable levels of privacy. That position warrants extra
scrutiny before giving them cash, not a wanton blind eye. It was very
disappointing to read an analysis of trading Facebook that parroted the
company’s actual propaganda, such as Facebook “connecting people” or creating
its fictional “global community.” Facebook has done no such thing.
[Outside](https://old.reddit.com/r/outside/) connects people. Socializing with
new people on the Internet connects people. Facebook records the results of
that, takes credit for it, then sells personal information gathered via
[increasingly predatory
surveillance](https://www.theverge.com/2018/4/11/17225482/facebook-shadow-profiles-zuckerberg-congress-data-privacy)
to its actual customers. The very idea that Facebook offsets that by providing
“genuine benefits” is specious at best, considering our [increased feelings of
sadness and
dissatisfaction](https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2013/08/19/213568763/researchers-facebook-makes-us-sadder-and-less-satisfied),
and [the reorganization of our entire concept of social group networking into
something much less
personal](https://www.theverge.com/2018/4/28/17293056/facebook-deletefacebook-social-network-monopoly).

Facebook’s measurable negative externalities include [diminishing our sense of
privacy](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/29/facebook-privacy-secret-profile-exposed),
[aiding
genocide](https://www.cnn.com/2018/04/06/asia/myanmar-facebook-social-media-genocide-intl/index.html),
and [harming our mental
health](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/may/19/popular-social-media-sites-harm-young-peoples-mental-health).
These may not be equivalent to an extinction event, but they are other issues
that impact the experience of *humankind*, which is an acceptable scale to be
*de facto* concerned about. Instead of engaging in such radical whataboutism as
“it’s fine as long as we’re not investing in killing us all,” we can address
problems of global import on their own merits and seek meaningful betterment of
the human condition. In that spirit, we’ll also need to confront that
Facebook’s attention business model is [fundamentally linked to those
externalities](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/apr/07/facebookgot-into-mess-cant-get-out-of-it-mark-zuckerberg-surveillance-capitalism),
which is an omnipresent incentive to ignore their effects on [two billion
people
worldwide](https://www.statista.com/statistics/264810/number-of-monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/)
in pursuit of the profit investors crave.

If the business model Facebook designed for itself makes itself an adversary to
the human race’s well-being, then why should we demonize an asset manager for
exercising whatever power he has to incentivise Facebook to improve? Why aren’t
we shouting praise from the rooftops, calling on other money-people in the
private sector to do the same while the slow government sanctions come through?
Isn’t that the kind of self-regulatory pressure Facebook is after when it
advocates against the government controls? 

It is immediately significant that the ethical hazard of being financially
involved in Facebook convinced an asset manager motivated by profit to divest.
More than that, it is an extremely positive sign, even if it’s in isolation
right now. Gilbert calls this “mission creep” and accuses Beslik of trying to
be a “moral arbiter.” I call it a consumer casting a vote with his wallet, a
money-person finally comprehending the correctional power he can hold over a
mega-corporation’s irresponsible leadership. This isn’t forcing other people to
not buy Facebook, as an arbiter might. It is simply deciding not to play
Facebook’s irresponsible game, and focusing on the plenty of other
opportunities out there to make money with more scrupulous, transparent
organizations.

Beslik’s own commentary on this move is understandably less couched in emotion
than my thoughts. To him, this is pragmatically acknowledging that you can’t
properly assess risks from Facebook’s significant ethical hazards when they are
so opaque about their business. To me, if Facebook won’t listen to the innocent
people it puts at risk with its services and it won’t be upfront with the
government regulators, then investors who try making them listen by withholding
funds are actual heroes.
