# Mark Twain the Copyright Victim
(2018-09-06)

I've just spent some time reading in Mark Twain's *Autobiography* to get a feel
for his famous zeal for copyright and branding. I was struck by--well,
firstly, his repulsive character--a small anecdote in 1868 that he called the
*Quaker City* Excursion (Vol. 1, pp. 226-226), which has a prelude in 1866. It
seems to be one of, if not the only, time that Twain found himself on the
receiving end of an entirely valid copyright infringement claim against his *The
Innocents Abroad*. Twain remains famous as a humorist, it's true, but he was
also famous in his day for his very public copyright trolling and continuous
conflation of copyright with the putative trademark doctrine of his era. The
Excursion story, dictated in 1904, is a fairly unique glimpse into Twain's
particular brand of selfishness and uncompromisingly petty heart, but it also
offers some real alternatives to perpetual copyright that allow artists to
profit without lording perpetual copyrights over their works like Twain wanted.

## The *Quaker City* Excursion
After being told to resign instead of facing the shame of being fired for being
a bad reporter (of all the traditional distinctions we've abandoned, why that
one?), Twain landed a gig for a California newspaper called the *Daily Alta*.
They wanted to send someone on a vacation to the Sandwich Islands for a few
months in 1866 and hired Twain for $20 ($317 in 2018) per letter for 50 letters
detailing his time ($15,850 in 2018). He sailed on a ship named the *Quaker
City*. These were well received and fairly popular among those who read his
account, something Twain, an inveterate profiteer, wanted to leverage into more
money. He decided to give a live lecture on his time in the Sandwich Islands,
$1 per person ($16 in 2018). That night, scared almost out of his wits by the
crowd and $400 richer ($6,340 in 2018), he decided to take it on the road,
speaking all throughout California and even in Nevada, making more and more
money and attracting a book deal from the American Publishing Company on the
east coast. They offered him a lot of money, and he set to work immediately at
adapting his letters into this longer travelogue. Only, there was a problem,
and there's a division over how he found about about it between his
*Autobiography* recollection and that of an *Alta* executive, Noah Brooks.

From Twain's point of view, his book tour continued and expanded further into
the country, where he seemed utterly unrecognizable and without reputation. Most
importantly, nobody was paying to come to his shows anymore. How could these
people have never heard of Mark Twain and his delightful letters from the
Sandwich Islands? As the elder Twain explained, "...the thirsty owners of that
prodigiously rich *Alta* newspaper had *copyrighted* all those poor
twenty-dollar letters, and had threatened with prosecution any journal which
would venture to copy a paragraph from them," and so the copyright worked its
wonders. Nobody had heard of Mark Twain because copyright prevented the words he
wrote from spreading to them. What a thing to come from a man who spent his
whole life doggedly pursuing wealth and advocating for Life+50 copyright terms,
if his ideal perpetuity remained out of reach. But, of course, Mark Twain was
not in the business of writing consistent policy; he was in the business of
writing humor and very jealous of his output, even if he had already sold it
away. He hated publishers and advocated for legislation to cut them out of the
copyright equation entirely, preferring Hawley's failed international copyright
bill to the successful Chace Act. Even though the solidification of copyright's
work-for-hire doctrine in *Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid* might
have been 100 years off, and we don't know if Twain explicitly signed away the
rights like *Reid* would require, work-for-hire was not a foreign concept and we
can assume the now-standard copyright transfer would have been in the contract
if written today. The *Alta* had bought the letters and paid for the copyright
registration, as was their prerogative.

Noah Brooks's alternate account recalled his *Daily Alta* colleagues getting
word of the upcoming book on the East Coast, based on the letters. They were
livid, having paid for that work and considering it their property. They
immediately decided to advertise their intention to print the letters in a cheap
paperback to beat Twain to the presses, which prompted a "perplexed" Twain's
return to California. At first, the paper rejected his pleas to publish the
letters, but "amicable councils prevailed," and Twain left California with his,
in Brooks's words, "undoubted copyright." In his dictated *Autobiography*, Twain
called Brooks "a good historian where facts were not essential," lumping him
with the other editors even though Brooks was publicly on his side. Perhaps he
misremembered Brook's 1898 note from several years after. Perhaps Brooks changed
his story to side with the now-famous humorist. Or, just perhaps, Twain was that
suspicious and petty.

As for the specific deal, Twain rejected the paper's initial consolation offer
of a courtesy 10% royalty on the paperback. Twain was incensed by
this, not expecting to live for three months off that and his presumably voided
book deal. For the record, this was a man who went on a joy trip to Hawaii and
sent overseas letters to his family cursing his brother for refusing to sell
their land in Tennessee. He considered himself forced to destitution while he
went horseback riding all over the big island. Twain's version of not surviving
for three months is not exactly a hardship, is all.

But, indeed, the *Alta* relented and granted his permission to write his book,
though they had one condition. The editors wanted a note of thanks for the
gesture at the start of the book. Twain refused even this on the grounds that
their copyright claim had bankrupted his lucrative lecture series, not to
mention that he was an ass in general. He mentioned that they waived the rights
in the front matter, but offered no thanks. Essentially, the newspaper donated
the letters back to him, and Twain was still so salty about it that he cursed
them 40 years after he published a book that was, in fact, quite lucrative
and came on the heels of a book tour wildly successful in its own right. For his
*Autobiography*, he even downplayed the role that the letters played in the
final product, saying that he ended up using perhaps 10-12 of them and pointedly
saying that the difference between a version with the letters' aid and one
without would have been a mere fortnight because he was just that swift a writer
at the time. Great. That was certainly also an option because facts aren't
copyrightable. To be fair, *Baker v. Selden*'s clarification of the
idea-expression divide was in 1880, but Twain did not believe in an 
idea-expression divide. ("...I wished he could mention any kind of property
existing on this planet, property that had a pecuniary value, [which was not 
derived from an idea or ideas](http://www.thepublicdomain.org/2014/07/19/mark-twain-on-the-need-for-perpetual-copyright/).")

## Alternatives to perpetual copyright
What insights into the solutions other than perpetual copyright does the *Quaker
City* Excursion offer, though? Well, what was the natural thing for Twain to
start doing after returning? He went on a book tour. We don't know how much
money he made from it, but that $400 ($6,340 in 2018) night was probably at
least representative of the dozens of shows he did in California. Twain was not
a starving artist, even before he was famous (even before he wrote, but that's
not so relevant). He took a little notoriety and turned it into speaking
engagements to make more money. That had nothing to do with the work's copyright
claimant, who certainly wasn't Twain. It's debatable how effective a book tour
can be in today's world, but an author will always be the one who wrote
such-and-such and said so-and-so. If doing that gave them clout, all they have
to do is turn up somewhere where someone wants to hear them sit down and talk
for an hour and they will have money or offer their audience some other way of
paying them more (merchandise or Patreon?). I'm not one who thinks one job
inherently better than another. However, if you consider that another person
would have to work their ass off for extended periods for the same chances,
we should at least acknowledge the privileged place authors and speakers
have in our society instead of pretending they're starving because it's
convenient to the agendas of greedy charlatans like Mark Twain. Aside, if
the writing of it did not generate an audience willing to pay in other ways,
then how likely is it that the copyright is terribly valuable on its own?

Another part of the *Autobiography* lamented that older folks shouldn't have to
raise their pens to make a living and should, instead, live comfortably on
royalties, as should their descendants. Though the solution was self-serving
hogwash that his fairly professionally accomplished daughters did not require
(he [told a misogynistic
lie](https://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/newsletter/inventors-eye/mark-twains-copyright-fight)
that they were "young ladies, who don't know anything and can't do anything."),
the problem of how society should care for the elderly is a real problem. My 
question is, why should authors have a separate elderly welfare program at the
expense of the entire world for a century after its supposed usefulness has died?
Let alone with Twain, a man who died with a $700,000 estate in 1910 ($18,568,863
in 2018). If we are to address the problem of how to care for people who no longer
wish to work at an advanced age, we can't do it piecemeal and at the behest of 
people who don't actually need any help.

Regardless, even under the rules of Twain's day, authors had a perfectly
respectable way of continuing to profit from their writings of the past beyond
marketing it creatively: releasing new authorized additions with changes. Part
of Twain's plans for his *Autobiography* was a plot to "extend" his copyrights
by including snippets of the dictated material in new books, and he thought
himself unworldly amounts of clever for this innovation he copied from another
author. Only...that is absolutely within the spirit of the copyright rule and
acceptable. It's encouraged, even. The marginal author, here Twain, was
incentivized to create a new, valuable work because of their desire for more
money derived from the exclusivity of copyright. Authors releasing new version
of their books with improved texts or additional material is a time-honored
tradition. Perhaps there are diminishing returns compared to the original
printing of the work, but interested people may still buy it. If nobody was
interested in buying it, then why should the copyright even make a difference?
Also, no, it would not have extended the copyright term of the original text
like Twain had convinced himself. Only the additions would have been
copyrighted, and the copyrighted sections would be exclusive to the new version.
Twain convinced himself of a lot of wrong things when it came to conflating
copyright and trademarks and had the court losses to prove it, though, so that's
not so surprising.

## Addendum: Fun facts
The preface to this anecdote is another story in which Twain recalls some
precious correspondence with Oliver Wendell Holmes, whose poem Twain had
unintentionally copied for the dedication in *The Innocents Abroad*. Twain wrote
Holmes a letter of sincere and deep contrition, destitute of dignity, only for
Holmes to laugh it off and absolve him of guilt. Twain recalled Holmes writing
"there was no crime in unconscious plagiarism; that I committed it every day;
that he committed it every day, that every man alive on the earth who writes or
speaks commits it every day and not merely once or twice, but every time he
opens his mouth; that all our phrasings are spiritualized shadows cast
multitudinously from our readings..." This letter is almost certainly the origin
of the same advice that Twain gave to a young Helen Keller after her own
plagiarism scandal. He famously told her ["all ideas are
second-hand"](https://www.brainpickings.org/2012/05/10/mark-twain-helen-keller-plagiarism-originality/),
and both Holmes and he were right, because [plagiarism is not
a crime](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2752139). 

The ending of the story seems to be what popularized the phrase "lies,
damn lies, and statistics." I suppose that's something more pleasant to remember
it for than Twain's extreme pettiness.

I would love to link directly to a copy of this 1904 dictation for you to read,
but the publishers of his *Autobiography* took it upon themselves to [bend the
copyright law beyond all
recognizability](http://www.bollier.org/mark-twains-final-copyright-crusade) to
see that it remain copyrighted until 2047, 137 years after Twain's death. And,
really, for what difference? Their very solid editorial work (Brooks's portion
of this narrative comes from the lovingly detailed back matter), and their
organization/rearrangement of his disparate work would have still been
copyrightable even if people would have been able to copy from the individual
public domain sections freely. Their book would have still been exclusive. God
forbid we have access to a dead man's memories on the Internet.
