# The Yankee Invasion or the Southern Rebellion? Why the United States Fought a Civil War

*This was one of the first papers I wrote in college, at Piece College Puyallup taking Mr. Churchill's US History I (Colonial to 1840).
It's probably the first term paper I ever did, and as such it reflects my high school writing style&mdash;I started college
at 16 through Running Start&mdash;which was very verbose word soup. Only, that's not being entirely fair to myself because
I remember Mr. Churchill had a very particular form that he wanted the paper to have, organized down to the vague subject
of each paragraph. This lead me to cram everything I had to say into huge paragraphs (think double-spaced, Times New Roman), two so large they fill whole pages. The paper is four pages long.*

*On top of that, I vaguely remember a page minimum of some sort, so certain sentences are obvious padding. But even if there wasn't one, that doesn't mean I didn't exceed it and keep writing like that, as I tended to do at the time. I remember getting a grade approaching full marks for this, which feels bad in hindsight.*

*If you're good with dates, you may be wondering why I wrote about the American Civil War (1861-1865) in a class subtitled "Colonial to 1840." It's because I got the dates messed up and thought we would be covering the actual war at the end of the class. The first part of this project was research over the first month of class, which we turned in as a paper proposal. Mr. Churchill was kind enough to let me and one other student who'd made the same mistake continue with the topics we chose.*

*Random memories of this class include the only time I ever raised my hand to ask to go to the bathroom in college or university. Mr. Churchill didn't make it embarassing for me explicity, but it was just such an interruption, and a hilarious indication of my age. Mr. Floyd Churchill himself was a very regal-ish ex-military man with a very particular manner. He was one of the first teachers I had who explicitly gave examples of political websites to follow to get different perspectives on the news, which I was terrible about as a suspicious and congenital Fox News viewer at the time, and which I am not great about today. I ran into him once several years later because he was teaching an adjunct class at the University of Washington, Tacoma. I don't know if he remembered me, but it was a pleasant, happy conversation.*

*This paper is a cringe-fest for me. Please try to look past the obvious vulnerability to right-wing apologia for the Civil War
I had at the time (I never did succumb to that sort of propaganda), and focus on how terrible the writing itself is.* (2018-12-29, before transcribing)

*I cannot believe I used the euphemism "internment" to describe African slavery. This is a good time to note that the Civil War was over slavery. There were other stressers, sure, but even bringing them up is like saying "I can't believe you didn't wash the dishes" after your spouse set the house on fire. We had been fighting amongst ourselves over slavery all along, including during the Continental Congress, when we agreed to enshrine slavery in* the Constitution *for 20 years to avoid the South pulling out of the Union before it was even founded. Slavery was so hot an issue that it wasn't even discussed openly until that Constitutional promise was bent by some Quakers bringing up abolition in the* first session of the United States Congress. *Southerners threatened succession* then. *The House voted to interpret the Constitution's 20 year moratorium on ending the slave trade as an indefinite moratorium on even* discussing a federal ending the slave trade, *which was exploited by Daniel Webster in 1833 to prevent further discussion because, in his words "I do not know of a different opinion since." We did this to keep the country together in the very beginning, when it could have easily come completely apart, and eventually it did. Over slavery. Which we had been fighting over for like 80 years. In fact, the delay that lead the war was fueled by fears that black people would seek vengeance against their white oppressors over slavery if the races were integrated, a fear that continues to loom over race issues today: white people are constantly afraid that any of the other ethnicities would dare to treat them as badly as white people treated them because those white people know the retaliation would be justified. You can read more about these considerations in* Founding Brothers *by Joseph Ellis.*

*Also, the North treated their slaves badly.*

*Also, it's weird that someone from Western Washington grew up thinking the South were so put-upon as to be deserving of the sympathy shown here. Maybe it has to do with Texas’s [domination of school textbooks](https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2012/06/21/how-texas-inflicts-bad-textbooks-on-us/).*

*Basically, I disavow this paper.*

*Speaking of how the United States' education system developed, [C-SPAN has a really interesting lecture]( https://www.c-span.org/video/?452465-1/pilgrims-history-textbooks) on how our cultural memories are designed through the education system, focusing on how the Pilgrims became the symbol for America as “different” in the grand scheme rather than the actual first colony, Jamestown.*

*It's pretty clear I didn't actually have a strong enough through-line for this paper. It wasn't helped by the strict paragraph topic structure imposed by the teacher, but I don't think there was much of a paper in trying to combine these minor causes of the Civil War. It ended up being a (stupid) description more than a historical argument.*

*I have preserved spelling and capitalization errors, as usual. My impeccable MLA citations have been abridged because I don't want to type all of it out.* (2018-12-29, during transcribing)

----

(2010-11-23)

Though Britain's North American colonies were settled nearly the same time, there existed a stark contrast between the settlements in New England and the plantations of Chesapeake Bay. The reasons behind the founding of these two regions, as well as how they were settled and would develop over the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, would greatly impact the country they would eventually form. Though these polarized viewpoints would prove invaluable during the formation of the United States, the irreconcilable differences between the industrial North and agrarian South would culminate in one of America's most trying conflicts, the Civil War. The realms would diverge on nearly any given issue of the period, most visibly on the continuing internment of African slaves, but many less obvious issues would further press the wedge between the North and South such as their takes on Christian theology and how they would instruct their youths. Analysis of this barbed dissimilarity reveals that the chafing regional prides of the North and South would place the budding United States on no course but to a bloody war among countrymen.

Slavery is what normally comes to mind when one thinks of the Civil War and it was a major issue between the colonies. It was first brought to the colonies in 1619 when a Dutch bondsman traded twenty African slaves to Virginian colonists for needed provisions (Pulley, 193). However, African slavery would not be immediately embraced by the British settlers. Initially, free Englishmen were sent to America to work off accumulated debts or simply pay their passage there as indentured servants. Hiring these Englishmen was less expensive than buying African slaves and therefore much more popular with the profit-seeking colonist. In the wake of Bacon’s Rebellion, an uprising spurred by a discontent former indentured servant in 1676, the wealthy landowners of the colonies realized that by shipping in able men as indentured servants to eventually be released they were essentially raising their future competition; in response, these affluent leaders turned more and more to African labor (Cornell, Keene, O’Donnell 55). The South took to slavery more than the North and treated slaves horrible. Slave owners used harsh slavery laws devised in Barbados to subjugate blacks and made them work like animals in the fields all day. This was not so in the north, where slaves were mainly house servants due to a lack of land for growing produce. Thus, while slavery became necessary for the South’s continued economic prosperity, the North could do without the institution. When initiatives to free the slaves emerged in society around the Revolution, abolitionists found a natural home in the North and tried to strong-arm the south into giving up their slaves. Both sides of the abolition debate would use religion to further their arguments.

The Chesapeake colonists generally followed Anglicanism's Christian doctrine stressing adherence to an established social order while the North was settled by a separatist religious element called the Puritans, who wished to split from the Anglican Church of England. Anglicanism's strict social order clashed greatly with the Puritan belief that everyone had to individually work in God's name to make the community productive. This also impacted the familial models of the regions, the Puritans settling as farming families while the South's population consisted mainly of single white men seeking their fortune in the New World. Many gentlemen, those of lowest noble standing, who possessed no practical skills and were adverse to physical labor flocked to the Chesapeake colonies. These men traversed the seas to strike it rich on precious ore deposits that did not actually exist and did not even try to create any kind of sustainable settlement in order to better pursue this fruitless goal while the North established several small permanent settlements within years of settlement (Cornell, Keene, O'Donnell 36, 45). The aristocratic system made it easy for the South to embrace slavery; they simply put blacks at the bottom of the social ladder. The individualistic culture of the North made simply embracing the practice more difficult and, eventually, the North would lead a charge to formally abolish the practice altogether. The regions' distinctions would be further propagated and imprinted upon future generations through their education systems.

Schooling was highly encouraged by the Puritan belief that there was a community responsibility to ensure a moral and literate progeny (Antler 259-60), whereas the Southerners, primarily seeking to make personal profit, made teaching the young more difficult not due to a lack of desire but to how they structured their colonies in pursuit of that goal. The south did not "settle" the land in the classical sense; those who came to the area merely dispersed and carved out as wide a lot of land they could support as a plantation, making a standardized school system practically impossible to construct. In the absence of an organized school system, the wealthy would hire private tutors for their children and the less affluent would do their best without public institutions, nursing a societal belief that education was an important private responsibility (Dyer 237). The North settled in small towns and kept them small by design, enacting the "half-mile law" that would forbid building residences more than a half mile from a meeting house (Shurtleff 157, 181) while the General School Law of 1647 mandated the founding of a school in every town of more than fifty families. Furthermore, because of their systems, the practiced and organized school of the North were far superior to those of the South, becoming the model for the middle colonies of the country and the future United States. Because of this, and despite a Southern educational renaissance occurring during the run up to the Revolution, many more of the country's influential citizens would call the North their home and would vigorously fight for Northern interests in Congress at the expense of Southerners who would foster a deep resentment for their prominent brothers. This animosity would ultimately culminate in Southern secession, notwithstanding several attempts at a compromise to allay this threat, and the Confederate States of America would be formed in 1861.

In the end, the differences between the North and South were simply too great to preserve the Union between their lands. With all the legislation, regulations, and trading monopolies the Northerners pushed through Congress with their majority, the South felt infringed upon by the sheer mass of the edicts. They felt their very way of life was at stake at this point in history and decided to secede, an action which the Unionist North regarded as unconstitutional and cause for a war. The economy of the plantocratic South depended upon slavery to operate and they could not simply cease the practice upon the North's request. Regional religion also played a role, leading the two groups' ideologies in divergent directions and forging different values in their future generations. This educational barrier between the North and South only served to intensify the situation. Though slavery was a main issue, if not the main stressor that lead to the war, there were other reasons for the quarrel that should not be neglected. These differences did not end with the four year war one hundred and forty-five years heretofore; it is important to see the origins of these still visible divisions originated. This applies to any relationship, whether between countries or people, if differences are not respected, it can lead to fighting and violent severance. With all said and done, the American Civil War is still discussed among peers on the East Coast. These were two peoples who could not even agree on a name for the war. While the North normally assigned it "The Southern Rebellion," the South gave it many monikers from "The War to Suppress Yankee Arrogance" to the "War for Constitutional Liberty" (Faust). Neither side really called it a "civil" war.

## Works Cited

### Books

Pulley, Raymond. "Virginia." *Dictionary of American History*. Vol. 7. 2003. 192-6.  
Keene, Jennifer, Saul Cornell, Edward O'Donnell. *Visions of America: A History of the United States*. 2010. 36, 45, 55.

### Encyclopedias

Antler, Joyce. "Education." *Encyclopedia of New England: The Culture and History of an American Region.* 1986. 259-60.  
Breen, Louise. "Civil War." *Encyclopedia of New England: The Culture and History of an American Region.* 1986. 675-77.  
Desmond, Jerry. "Religion." *Encyclopedia of New England: The Culture and History of an American Region.* 1986. 1273-77.  
Dyer, Thomas. "Education." *Encyclopedia of Southern Culture.* 1989. 237.  
Faust, Patricia. *Historical Times Illustrated Encyclopedia of the Civil War.* 1986.  

### Government Documents

General School Law of 1647.  
*Records of the Colony of New Plymouth in New England.* Ed. Nathaniel Shurtleff. 1633-1640. 1855. 157, 181.
