# Blue Book
Another blue book from Beth Stevens' *American Literature I* class. I think it's the last one I have, and it was loose among my papers from school. It didn't make it into my high school portfolio because I didn't finish either prompt I was given. ...And, yet, I still got a 93/100? 

Beth wrote of the first response "beautiful ideas&mdash;articulate, insightful, & thorough," then "really, overdeveloped&mdash;control your ideas..." (31/33)

Of the second, "great line of discussion," then "seems like you might have run out of time..." (62/67) (2019-01-19, before transcription)

Does anyone else read things that you wrote ten years ago and feel justified in time traveling to kill yourself? Writing this cliche-filled and bad... (2019-01-19, before transcription)

-----

(2010-00-00)


##Part 1: American Individualism
1)  
From our country's inception, we have glorified and honored those who brought it into beng, from George Washington to Thomas Jefferson. They lead the people a great rebellion that shook the world to its core and would shape the center of the american psyche, impacting Americans to this day. Americans love rebels. This permeates into all aspects of our production, especially or literary culture, producing some of the most prodigious writers the world has ever known, leaving their marks with an undeniably American twist, proclaiming our defiance in the face of those who proclaim people must be the same as all others. Washington Irving's famed short story "Rip Van Winkle" told of the titular character's marriage to a shrew of a woman. The every man just wished to be alone to do what he loved. This is a great tenet of American life as it is a place where the individual is praised and when a person's wishes to have personal activity is denied, Americans rally behind them. All he wished to do was "...sit on a rock, with a rod as long and heavy as a Tartar's lance, and fish all day without a murmur..." (Irving 457). On that same coin, we want to be able to think as we please, something which another great writer of Irving's time, Ralph Waldo Emerson, stressed in his his defense of American scholarship, "The American Scholar." He believed that listening to the ways of how the Europeans thought was futile&mdash;we had already declared our separation from them&mdash;and that though "[t]he spirit of the American freeman is already suspected to be timid, imitable, [and] tame" (Emerson 532), we are "a nation, of men [that] for the first time exist[s], because each believes himself inspired by the" Divine Soul which also inspires all men. These two embody the free thinking, financially universal belief system that americans can be as they want to be.

##Part 2

[a/n: later. holy shit, i have to take a break after that trainwreck]
