# A ½ Star Review of Star Wars: The Last Jedi

(2018-04-20, [letterboxd](https://letterboxd.com/lethargilistic/film/star-wars-the-last-jedi/))

*I wrote about 70% of this, stream-of conscious, immediately after I walked out of the theatre and got home from a Lyft ride,
leaving my dad and brothers at the theatre. It was a very unpleasant experience in its own right, explaining why I hated a movie 
that I wanted to like more than any other I'd seen before. More than that, a lot of people expected me to hate it, and did so for
all the wrong reasons, which is eternally irritating in its own way.*

*If you're less interested in reasing this because it's long, fine, but it describes
the very specific, unique reasons behind why I didn't like it. Rey is not an issue of contention, for example; it's about
what the story's themes say as a response to the original* Star Wars *films' inspirational themes. Namely,* The Force Awakens
*and* The Last Jedi *thought those movies were wrong to try to inspire people to rebel. The sequels want people to say in their
lanes and accept the inevitability of their struggles against and defeat at the hands of unknowable forces. They are hopeless,
dreary affairs that ask you to just resist, and I go into why in more depth here.*

*The only other thing to say is that, if you say "This movie sucks. We should remake it
differently," you want copyright reform.* The Force Awakens *AND* The Last Jedi *ARE BOTH "*Star Wars* sucks. Let's remake it
differently." And they are produced by a company that works to prevent us all from exercising that right on works going
back to* Steamboat Willie. *The Sequel Trilogy's existence could be summed up as "We only care about stopping remakes 
made by poor people."*

*I'm not terribly interested in whether or not you liked the movie, no.*

-----

I have never walked out of a movie before. I didn't do it because I wanted to hate the movie. I didn't do it because I was angry. I did it because, after an hour, I was profoundly sad. 

I did it even though I was there with my father and two of my brothers. I did it even though I've been a Star Wars fan all my life. I'm glad that the movie theatre manager made an exception and gave me a voucher for a free movie as a refund, but I'm not sure I'll completely recover from this. My attachment to <i>Star Wars</i> has been damaged by it, since it's the third awful movie in a row since the reboot.

And I know what you're thinking: "Oh, he's just upset because it's not <i>his Star Wars</i> anymore," and I'd be lying if I denied that completely. That's not really a reason to like or dislike the individual movie, or the movies as they exist as a trilogy, though. It doesn't necessarily have to appeal to me particularly as a long-term fan. However, it is a reason that I dislike the movie's place within the universe of <i>Star Wars</i> because neither <i>The Force Awakens</i> nor this provides any good expansion of the Star Wars universe. It's all surface level, and that surface is not good. When I saw The Force Awakens in theatres, I went there hoping that it would be good and take us somewhere we had never been before. Instead, I was treated to an extensive retread that revealed that the Jedi Order was gone within 30 years. At the time, it was unclear if Luke Skywalker had ever reestablished it, and it appears that he did and failed, based on spoilers. This is certainly an improvement to the big unknown, but it is just as bad worldbuilding and long-term storytelling as when the same thing happened at the beginning of <i>Star Wars: Legacy</i>. And at least that began 100 years later and was a decent story in spite of the foreshortening of the events of the "current" Legacy era stories of the time. Mark my words, there will be decisions as poor as having Jaina marry Jagged Fel, which was made simply because their descendents ruled the Fel Empire in <i>Legacy</i> made just because of the time crunch between the Original Trilogy and this Sequel Trilogy. A friend, Kenneth Love, reminded me before I watched <i>The Last Jedi</i>, when I raised that issue, that the Galactic Empire was made out to be this thing that had been around forever, but had only been around for, at most 25 years. At least, in that case, the Empire was literally the same government as the Galactic Republic, under a new constitution, that had lasted for 30,000+ years. Luke's New Jedi Order will die out in any media between the trilogies within 30 years, and that is a deeply depressing, short amount of time for all the promise that we are left off with by <i>Return of the Jedi</i>.

But perhaps that's too meta, and I probably lost people already by discussing parallels to Legacy. Let's move on to the movie itself.

As I said, when I watched TFA, I was turned off by the Jedi Order no longer being around. That was revealed in the credits and set me in a bad mood, regardless of the very open mind I went into the theatre with. Similarly, The Last Jedi made another misstep in the crawl that threw me off: it revealed that the First Order has taken over the galaxy. There are two interpretations of this, and neither is very favorable. The first, somewhat better, option is that this is trying to tell us, retroactively that the First Order had displaced the New Republic before TFA. If that were the case, we were not properly told that within the first film even though it would have been trivial to do so. In fact, I'm fairly certain that we were given the impression that the New Republic was top dog and that, collectively as a global audience, we were confused about why the side without ersatz Stormtroopers was called "The Resistance" at all because, if so, they were not resisting. The second option is that this movie is trying to say, retroactively, that the First Order was victorious at the end of TFA, which is not true. The Starkiller was destroyed. They lost. Kylo Ren was defeated by someone who had never carried a lightsaber before. He lost. They did remember that about Kylo, but the point is that the First Order <i><strong>lost.</strong></i> Rey being in the same place that she was at the end of TFA means that essentially no time has passed between the seventh film and the eighth. There were such shifts between the films of the Original and Prequel Trilogies because years passed between them. You don't get to completely turn around the central conflict of the series at this point with a few scrolling words and, at most, a few in-canon days. This is terrible mishandling of the universe. Not only do we not understand what the First Order even <i>is</i> in relation to (we assume) the Galactic Empire, we now have even less of a concrete idea of what the scope of their power was in these movies than we did before. This is the central villainous organization, and we don't know what their stakes are. What in the world was even the plan for this set of stories? Where has it gone? Even those unfamiliar with the Legacy universe, the primary demographic of these movies, <i>must</i> see this enforced doublethink as a problem, right?

But then the movie started proper and we got our first scenes. We begin the middle entry of this trilogy with characters we've never seen before looking up at a battle in space. A scene much like this was cut from <i>A New Hope</i>. You know why? Because it added nothing to the plot and the characterization of Luke and his friends from Tatooine (even including Biggs) was not worth the dead air. The TLJ space battle comes to an abrupt halt, though, with the Republic behind.

After TFA released, Rey was quite publicly called a Mary Sue. Cutting that tangent short, I'll say that do I mostly agree with that, but have you even <i>seen</i> Poe Dameron in The Last Jedi? This movie takes that criticism of the overpowered characters in the first movie in both hands and beats your suspension of disbelief, wielding it like a massive hammer. One man in a light fighter approaching a Star Destroyer and hailing them is enough to cause an effective ceasefire? When I realized what joke they were starting the movie with and heard how they delivered the lines, I said to myself "I want to leave" before they had cut from Hux's face. The Star Destroyer that intends to take no prisoners will take the call of a lone fighter, starting off a Star Wars film, not just with a joke, but a terrible troll that makes no sense? That lone fighter will singlehandedly strafe and take down parts of a Star Destroyer? Of all the Legends material that I would have expected a Sequel Trilogy movie to steal from (Thrawn's trilogy, <i>Legacy of the Force</i> like TFA did heavily, perhaps in mine and others' dreams <i>Knights of the Old Republic</i>), I <strong>NEVER</strong> would have expected a single ship to strafe under a Star Destroyer's shields and start taking it out singlehandedly like in <i><strong>The New Rebellion.</strong></i> I liked that book more than other people did, but that was the weakest single moment in it. The movie tries to justify this with straight up BS that the cannons can't turn fast enough to hit him. If the cannons of this time period cannot track light fighters, how were they able to take out fighters flying down the Death Star trench? Not only that, they <i>had</i> to up the ante even further by scrambling TIE Fighters against this single pilot, who only got hit ONCE and faced essentially no difficulties from that hit. It's as if the movie were screaming into your face "Hey, you thought Rey was lowkey a Mary Sue? Hold my fucking beer, dude, because here's that guy you saw for five minutes of the last movie!"

Then a fight scene ensued that lasted the rest of the first 30 minutes. The first fifth of the movie. In the end, nothing else of consequence occurred within that time except another horrible joke about electricity somehow leaking like water because of the aforementioned hit and a character I know nothing about dying in a fireball after barely hitting a red button that I knew she was going to end up pressing. Because I knew that, there was no tension. The movie couldn't have just had her press it, though. It needed an extended sequence of someone we don't know kicking a ladder. You notice how the movie cut from the button falling to her side and her picking it up out of the air without showing her body turning over? That's because it had already fallen past her in the first shot and it would have been impossible for her to turn over and pluck it out of the air blind in one take, no matter that the entire scene was practically entirely CGI anyway. They could have made it look any way they wanted to, and they made it look as bad as (im)possible. I know that it was about 30 minutes because I checked my phone for the time and realized I would remain there for another two hours. Kenneth warned me that the first 30 minutes might be difficult for me, so I resolved to trudge on.

After waiting through that, we rejoin Finn as he wakes from his coma, apropos of nothing and played off with a joke complete with awkward water spouting from nowhere even after he leaves the hospital room and meets his friend of five minutes, Poe. It's not like we were ever supposed to be worried for his safety after TFA ended, right? Right.

Then we go see Rey and Luke Skywalker, a downtrodden man with the weight of the world on his shoulders who has decided to give up on his life's work of reviving the Jedi Order. At the same time, he is a petulant jokester. These things do not go together at all, most of all because this is a radical departure from the plucky bumbler of the Original Trilogy. I'm sorry I keep going back to these two words, but I have to explain here that Luke Skywalker was not a Mary Sue in the Original Trilogy. First of all because a Mary Sue is, by all the competing definitions, someone introduced in a derivative work; a character in the original work is not a Mary Sue. More towards the point I'm trying to make, Luke failed at almost everything he attempted to acheive, across the entirety of the Original Trilogy. I'm almost surprised he was successfully born in <i>Revenge of the Sith</i>.

Think about it. He failed to enter the Imperial Academy. He failed to save Obi-Wan Kenobi's life. He failed to defend the base during the Battle of Hoth and got knocked over by a random wampa on a scouting mission. He failed at every single stage of his Jedi Training under Yoda. Speaking of which. He failed to complete his Jedi training on Dagobah and instead went to rescue Han and Leia against his teachers' wishes. He fails to defeat Darth Vader and loses a hand in the process because he fought that foe before he was ready. He fails to rescue his sister from Jabba the Hutt and she has to free herself while he gets rescued. He goes to face his father on the Death Star II and utterly fails to turn him to the light while almost submitting to the dark side and becoming Darth Sidious's apprentice during the ensuing fight, ultimately choosing not to go through with it. But he never gave up. In <i>A New Hope</i>, Luke succeeds at two main things: learning the very basics of the Force on an incidental trip to see Bail Organa on Alderaan, and shooting a hole on the Death Star. He was a skilled pilot, as established earlier in the film. In the end, he did use the Force to fire that true shot into the duct, but he did not go into that fight intending to do that. He did one action that was entirely in his and every other Rogue Squadron pilot's power correctly in that first movie. After each of those many failures, he did not give up. Not when Obi-Wan died on the Death Star, not when they placed Han in carbonite freeze, not when his ship got stuck in the Dagobah swamp, not ever. And that's what makes him a wonderful character who is remembered fondly enough to bring back to screens 40 years later. 

I understand from spoilers that he is like this because considered failing to prevent Ben Solo's fall to the dark side a great sin. I understand that that was a very personal tragedy and consider him being embittered by it a valid turn of events. But the Luke Skywalker in <i>The Last Jedi</i> is an entirely different character with none of the spark of the original to keep me engaged. He gave up completely. He ran away and abandoned <i>the galaxy</i> to fall to a sect of Dark Jedi&mdash;the Grand Master of the New Jedi Order abandoned <i>the galaxy</i> to an abusive force because of a personal trauma? Unbelievable. They turned Luke into a suspicious, cowardly old man so that they could have him be a more difficult Master, similar to Yoda in technique, but completely opposite Yoda in terms of attitude and beliefs.

That's the thing about these sequels that personally offends me more than any other thing: the ethos of these movies is not just different than the Original Trilogy's, it must be meticulously attempting to be the antithesis of that ethos. Original Trilogy Luke was trying to break the bonds of his life on the Tatooine moisture farm that were holding him back from joining the Imperials, then he discovered that the Imperials controlled a system that kept everyone in the galaxy down and chose to help break those bonds for everyone else. Han was a cold smuggler with a soft side, motivated primarily by credits (amoral at worse, not immoral), who learned to believe in a cause again following a long period of disillusionment caused by his time at the Imperial Academy that Luke couldn't attend. (I legitimately don't remember if Han mentioned he went to the Academy in the actual <i>A New Hope</i> film, but the point stands even without that detail.) Leia spent her entire life fighting to take power userped by the Dark Lords of the Sith and give it back to the Senate and to thereby restore rights to Galactic Republic citizens. They are chasing their dreams by fighting the system that seems omnipowerful and their own beliefs about their limitations. They are lifting the X-Wing out of the swamp. They are turning around, shooting down Darth Vader, and committing to a cause that they know is righteous to fight alongside their friends in spite of there being no money in it. They are literally taking their chains and strangling their captors to death with them.

All of the protagonists originating in the Sequel Trilogy run from everything. Finn, forced to serve the First Order, runs away from his unit and does everything he can to avoid facing the Order that's trying to hunt him down. Rey refuses the call to action of meeting Finn in TFA, and all of their story-driving moves together were running away, whether away in the Falcon or away from Kylo Ren. Rather than seeking to improve herself as Luke did when he sought out Yoda, she seeks out Luke Skywalker to literally hand back the symbolic baton to the previous generation and rely on him rather than enacting change. She is entirely willing to leave him because he doesn't want to teach her, provided he gives her an explanation to pass on to Leia. Kylo Ren spends the first and what I saw in this movie chasing the legacy of his grandfather rather than choosing his own path and submits to the corrupt system rather than trying to define himself throughout the first movie. I understand that he kills Snoke, so that is a step in the right direction if he gives up his Vader fixation as well. Poe runs from the Order in TFA, and protests the consequences for his solo missions leading to the destruction of at least three larger ships and the deaths of many people. His best excuse was that they were heroes for dying like that, to which Leia gave a proper response that he was a dumbass. Worse, this ethos reversal tainted the Original Trilogy cast as well. Luke runs away from his responsibilities and then Han and Leia run away from their marriage in response to Ben's betrayal. 

So, yeah, maybe I'm attached to the way things used to be, but the Original Trilogy and even, to some extent, the similar parts of the Prequels were designed to be an inspiration to generations of rebels. They showed us that we could change the world if we didn't give up and honed our skills. The Disney-era Star Wars movies seek to replace those inspiring messages with a deep, overpowering sense of pessimism and hopelessness: the belief that the system is overpowering, unknowable, and unmoveable. It's the difference between encouraging your child to talk about what is important to them and telling them that their ideas will never amount to anything. They don't rebel; they merely resist.

And then there is contrition and a resignation with our past mistakes displayed by Kylo Ren, who failed to take down two people who have never held lightsabers before in the last movie and was rightly chastised for that failure by Snoke. I like that aspect of continuity in this scene, although the way it was phrased made it feel like criticism of TFA itself and pandering to me. Why would I dislike such a thing in a movie I despised about a movie I despised? Because that phrasing made the whole scene feel like padding and it made Snoke, a very enigmatic figure in the previous film, seem very small in the narrative. I know that's a weird way to phrase that, but you know how some series will have a little one-off character show up to make a joke about how none of this makes any sense and it breaks the fourth wall without anything really being added to the work? It's like that. It's artificial. Much like the rest of the scene between Snoke and Ren because the rest of their dialogue came out of left field: suddenly, Ren has some extremely buried regrets about killing his father in TFA and this information is conveyed to us via a different character's exposition with no foreshadowing in the previous movie or this one? I admit it would have been difficult to foreshadow this because it was Ren's first scene, but they managed to squeeze in a scene with Ren's mask (and AWFUL, UNINTELLIGIBLE voice changer) that emasculated him for even wearing that because Snoke didn't respect the Knights of Ren. I don't respect the Knights of Ren either, because they are barely even a concept in these movies, but that doesn't mean I'll feel better if the film series tells me they'll never amount to anything. Why were they brought up as a <i>faction</i> in this story in the first place. This isn't exactly a womp-rat where we understand it's an animal hunted for sport. An organization to which a major character belongs to and whose ethos is seemingly derived from is kind of important, don't you agree? Again, this is so artificial and seems to exist just as a meta distraction from what we're supposed to get out of this scene: that Ren and Snoke do not have a positive relationship. I assumed this information because, even if they are not Sith, they are clearly a parallel to the Rule of Two. I guess that's there for the people who might be confused as to how someone would choose to stay as an underling for a horrible boss. That angle on the scene is fine, and it's probably solidified as both a parallel to the previous films and some moral when Ren later kills Snoke, but there's another dimension to the scene that has bothered me while watching these two movies and <i>Rogue One</i>: the new Star Wars movies are just so mechanical.

In walks Ren to be insulted by the highest-ranking evil character, who talks about their ultimate agenda and about the dark side. We've seen that before, but then Snoke takes a pause in an unnatural place in the middle of a sentence. Why? Dramatic effect? Not really. They wanted to play the dark side theme in the middle to drive home the fact that we should recognize this. The entirety of TFA was an homage to ANH. Especially given Luke's isolation, there are obvious parallels to ESB in TLJ. <i>Rogue One</i> was a series of conversations and exposition by people surrounded by recognizable <i>Star Wars</i> imagery. We've seen all of this before. The most experimental label you could apply to TLJ is that it's trying hard to be a comedy, but there were plenty of funny moments in the other films and they punctuated the story rather than try to overwhelm everything while falling completely flat. Even if you dislike the prequels, and I enjoy them to various degrees, you couldn't call them mechanical or flat. Their stories added meaningful things to the universe without clinging to what had come before in such a slavish way and, in so doing, they took risks. Actual risks. Taking the Jedi out of the equation to put dark Jedi back on top is the unfortunate status quo in Star Wars; plunging the galaxy into a war between clones and droids based on Sith lies and subterfuge was a risk we had never seen before. And I say that as someone who generally dislikes <i>Attack of the Clones</i>. But I digress again. After Ren leaves Snoke, he joins an attack on the Resistance, where he passes up the opportunity to kill her.

Kylo refused to kill his mother for no reason. This is supposed to parallel to his deep-down feelings of being reluctant to kill his father, but we didn't get any actual details on that, so there's nothing really behind it except our cultural understanding that killing a parent is not good. &ellips;But we already saw him cross that cultural line, so what does this really tell us about his character in the context of the story? Not a ton, and it took its sweet time. It's just a scene in a larger battle that amounts to nothing because Leia's bridge was destroyed anyway. The vacuousness of that scene put me over the edge, to be honest. Here's a character who I've enjoyed spending time with for most of my lifetime: I witnessed her apparent death and I felt nothing. Partially because I knew she wasn't dead because I knew she would appear alive later in the movie, sure, but mostly because her death would have meant absolutely nothing there. Narratively, emotionally, practically, metanarratively (Carrie Fisher's untimely death was not their fault, but you must admit that it impacts your viewing of the movie and it affected me here) the death of <i>Leia Organa</i> would have been absolutely meaningless if they had followed through with it there. It's like they put a huge chicken in front of you, expecting you to salivate and telling you explicitly that you should salivate, but you sit down at the table and see that it's completely uncooked, albeit maybe they took the chicken out of the store's plastic wrap. That's a really weird simile, but follow me here and imagine that, having noticed this, you say you'd like to leave and they tell you like a child that you have to sit at the table for at least 30 minutes or take 3 no-thank-you bites. You're not going to risk salmonella, so they're really just forcing you to sit there. And sit there. And sit there. Looking at Leia as it's slowly revealed that she, daughter of midichlorically-unprecedented Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker and sister of one of the greatest Jedi Grand Masters who ever lived (er, if his temple hadn't failed so immediately), can use the Force.

I'm shocked; <i>shocked</i>. Rocked to <i>my core</i> by how much they doubled down on the reveal of something so obviously a possibility that they mentioned it in a quite obscure film from 35 years ago, <i>Star Wars: Episode VI: Return of the Jedi</i>. Let alone that the Expanded Universe eventually made her a Jedi Master within the New Jedi Order. This is supposed to be a revelation worth all those endless panning shots of her body floating in space, her face as she floats in space, her arm as she reaches out while floating in space, and her moving with her arm reaching out as she floats in space? It's been suggested to me that they kept every second of Carrie Fisher's performance in the movie because of her death. Sentiment appreciated, but I'm pretty sure this scene could have taken less time to film than it did to display and every second of it is an eternal vacuum of information in an extremely bloated 1 hour of footage that I watched, at which we've reached the end of my tolerance for terrible storytelling I can't pause. I watched all of <i>Rogue One</i> in one sitting, and that was torture, but it doesn't hold a candle to <i>The Last Jedi</i>. What developments happened in those first 30 minutes my friend told me I may not enjoy?

Poe pranked Hux and took on that Star Destroyer, an Asian Resist(er?) gets spotlighted and owns an obnoxiously revealed half-medallion that I assume matches a medallion held by the Asian actress who was in the TLJ promotional materials, and a bunch of Resistance ships were destroyed. Of those 30 minutes, only the very beginning and the very end had anything to do with setting up what the film was going to be about; the rest was a bunch of ships flying around and explosions in which we have no investment unless you happen to care about the person who was in TFA for 5 minutes. If you do, fine, but there's nobody else we know in any peril. The second thirty minutes consisted of a lot of housekeeping from TFA that essentially swept away most of the hanging threads from the previous film, pushed me through all of the above thoughts, and took its sweet time doing so. We're introduced to Luke, sure; Finn is awake now, sure; Leia chastises Poe, sure; Snoke chastises Kylo Ren, sure; the First Order attacks the Resistance again, sure. Very little of that can be catalysts for whatever missions the characters are going to undertake in the second half. I'm sure Poe has a change of heart about getting all of those people killed and tries to save lives later, but none of this has to do with why those lives were in danger. I'm sure Luke faces his demons by confronting Kylo because I've seen pictures of that happening, but none of this setup would lead to that confrontation other than Rey's mere existence. I'm sure the Asian Resist(or...?) has some relation to the promoted character, but I'm also certain that it equally amounts to "My sister died because of Poe's irresponsibility and I'll never forgive the First Order for killing her, even if I'll forgive Poe eventually if not immediately." I know Kylo kills Snoke later, but this just showed us a negative status quo of their relationship, not a reason for Kylo to betray him. I know that one's a weird thing to say, but I'm talking in the greater context of Dark Jedi within Star Wars. There's nothing that seems to be at stake that would cause Kylo to betray Snoke, other than the bare minimum Rule of Two thing where the apprentice killing the master means the Sith are stronger overall. With no narrative frills or stakes, that's kinda boring; the reason it worked for people like Darth Bane and Darth Zannah was because the lineage of the Sith itself was what was at stake (nevermind the incredibly stupid setup of <i>Fate of the Jedi</i>). Anyway. I'm sure Rey gets trained by Luke eventually, and I guess that starts later, but that was in promotional footage and didn't need to take half the movie to start in earnest&mdash;and wouldn't have, if Luke Skywalker were in character. Do you see what I mean? Of the few things it does set up for the second half directly, those are the things we were meant to go into the movie anticipating anyway.

And while all of that nothing of consequence was happening within that first hour, I saw neither hide nor hair of the supposedly major characters Captain Phasma or Admiral Holdo. Considering that both major factions had their command structure shown to us during the battle, I can only conclude that they were sidelined in this bloated picture, much like Phasma was sidelined to meaninglessness in TFA. To go a little off-script, I find that deeply irritating because women deserve a new Leia Organa (Solo) who is important, not someone who shows up for a few scenes in the actual movie and then does photoshoots to remind them that women, at the very least, <i>exist</i> in <i>Star Wars</i>. I saw more of Admiral Ackbar in the introduction and he is a Mon Calimari fish man. There is a difference between meaningful diversity and mere inclusion.

Maybe you noticed that the raw events of the movie are somewhat downplayed in this review. That's because essentially nothing of consequence occurred within that first hour, and none of that nothing was distracting me from all of these thoughts I've recorded here for you. This is how I watched the movie, and all the many awful aspects of the film were front and center because there were no distractions. I can totally believe that some people who are coming back to the movie after they've thought about it are lowering their scores and raising critical questions of their own. I just was so taken out of the movie upon first viewing by the atrocious opening minutes and joke that being in that theatre was like an out of body experience. I watch that movie and I watched myself watching the movie, noting all the major and minor things while noticing myself squirm and check the time on my phone first after 30 minutes, then after another 15 minutes, then after another 5. Eventually, I had to walk out of a theatre screening for the first time, or I was risking an episode of bitter tears with nothing to show for that remaining hour and a half other than knowledge of events presumably presented just as poorly as what I'd already seen.

But what was the biggest reason I walked out? At home, I will often pause movies that I'm enjoying (or not) if I grow tired of them in the middle. Not only did <i>The Last Jedi</i> make me feel tired and sad, it is the first <i>Star Wars</i> movie I've ever seen that made me feel like begrudgingly watching it on a friend's copy of the DVD in three years because I'm alone and bored and skipping to the part at which I left would be a better experience than continuing to sit there, next to my family, and suffer in silence for another hour and a half. I'm just so tired and sad now that this has overtaken <i>Dose of Reality</i> as the all time film I've enjoyed the least. I finished <i>Dose of Reality</i> in one sitting.

I'm not a fan of JJ Abrams, so I expect the final film of this trilogy to be at least as disappointing as TFA was. The idea of Rian Johnson directing an entire Star Wars trilogy makes me feel even more sick than the idea of Dave Filoni coming back to direct <i>Star Wars: Rebels</i> as he had directed <i>Star Wars: The Clone Wars</i>. A lifelong fan, I don't believe I'll be returning to the Disney version of the Galaxy Far, Far Away any time soon, not even if someone else is paying.
