# Distraction Hampers Democratic Culture

*The third essay for Lori Alward's TCSS 325: Computers, Ethics, and Society. We watched a documentary called* Digital Nation: Life On The Virtual Frontier, *which I do not remember in particular. The paper topic was an open-ended response to the movie and how digital technology is changing our culture. For this, we read "Why Collaborative Free Works Should be Protected by the Law" by Larry Sanger and "Digital Speech and Democratic Culture" by Jack Balkin. I saw some notes about "shop work" in my binder for this class, which I think was related to Sanger.*

*Some of my pages of notes for this essay came from my work with MSL. They are extra copies of pages I printed explaining gear ratios, or perhaps ones where I mistakenly printed on only one side. I made little tools with LEGOs for the kids to use to explore gear ratios practically. I remember that one going OK. But it also reminds me of the lesson I made that went the worst, because of course it does. I tried to get them to do a really conceptual puzzle thing to demonstrate figuring out a math idea on their own, but I fucked up explaining the rules and it blew up in my face. It got worse when I tried to explain it because having to skip to the end without the intermediary steps--the actual LESSON component--made my mind jump to algebra, which I knew they hadn't learned. I literally stopped in the middle of a sentenceand went "do you want to do something else?" and they said "yeah." That part was funny in hindsight, I guess. Such cringe. The MSL program ended at the end of July, so this was the first paper I turned in after it ended.* (2020-07-29, before transcribing)

*Man, I remember us talking about "digital natives" in class and me talking about it as though I was not one, or didn't feel like one. My family got its first computer when I was about 6 or 7, if I remember correctly. No internet. Probably Microsoft Windows 3.1. Chip's Challenge. Tyson, who I believe was in his early-to-mid 30s, laughed at me. Rightfully so. ^^; I remember being the one who smashed that computer with a hammer so we could throw it away a long time later.*

*"If popular culture is to be held up to the same standard that political speech is, consider people who care more about whether or not Usagi and Mamoru kiss in* Sailor Moon *than landmark Supreme Court cases." Boy, if you do not shut the fuck up... This was such a self burn, but (unusual for me!) one I couldn't have realized at the time. I used the example because I was rewatching* Sailor Moon *then, but my interest in "landmark Supreme Court cases" was limited only to whatever trickled out of Fox News because they were mad about The Gays or whatever. I was absolutely one of those people who cared more about Usagi and Mamoru than* Marbury v. Madison. You fucking weeb. *Hell, I was probably thinking of* Burwell v. Hobby Lobby, *a case decided a month or two earlier that I only knew about because of Fox News and had never read because I had never seriously read a Supreme Court decision in my life at this time. I sure as fuck wasn't talking about *Alice v. CLS*. There's a note by my use of the phrase "comparable value" in relation to this: "Really interesting question. What does "comparable value" mean? (I can think of 3 or 4 different meanings just off the top of my head.)" Fair.*

*It's so cringey to read how elitist I was. So above it all. Yet I was submerged in right-wing propaganda and filth. The thrust of this seems to be that I was a rationalist, trying to advocate for Quality Speech and Improving The Discourse. I'm pretty far away from that now. I don't really care what something says as long as it's not deliberately harmful in some way. I'm more interested in what it adds to my understanding of the world, whether it follows the authors' argument or not and whether my thought is well-founded or not at that time. Plenty of people have convinced themselves of the value of shit like race science because they thought about bad ideas long enough and just "tried them out" or "followed where ThE ScIeNcE led." I reject that as the only valid epistemology.*

*God. God. God. I used the word "homosexuals" to make the paper sound more scholarly or distance myself from my internalized homophobia. How emarassing. Needless to say, I disavow the part where I call the acceptance of gay people "a moral issue, whatever side one falls on it" The phrasing is innocuous, but I sense it is a weasel word and it's literally "both sides"-ing the issue. Ms. Alward left the note that "some people see it as a political issue" and she's more right. Well. On reflection, it's true that getting to know at least a few gay people in college over the years did counter my homophobia quite a bit. So maybe I'm not being entirely fair to myself in hindsight. This is an artifact from an earlier point on my path towards enlightenment, and I'm still walking that path today.*

*I still think of the guy who says he reads online summaries from time to time. I still think he, in particular, had bad media habits, but for different reasons. Here, I detest him simply because he doesn't read works in full and is not interested in doing so. I say a summary of Shakespeare couldn't convey some nuance and then describe that nuance completely in one sentence. It's an asinine argument. Now, I know that reading entire works is mostly unnecesary. It's a luxury, and it can only really be done for the books that strike iron in your soul or books where you're ready to accept that you don't care when you hit diminishing returns on continuing. Doing otherwise, especially automatically just because "you're supposed to read entire books" is fucking stupid. It's a waste of your life. Nonetheless, I condemn him for reading those summaries because he's doing is because he feels like he has to. If you're not interested, just don't do it. What he's doing just perpetuates a myth of pomposity that says that mere familiarity with famous works of art makes you a better person. It pits us all against each other as we compete to consume the most art that's been sanctified by the high class even though membership in the high class is based on wealth, not the books you've read. Whatever, you wannabe-bourgious bootlicker. There's a note by Ms. Alward that reads, "Or the experience of the work, which is valuable, as well. (Does that make sense? To distinguish between experience the work and understanding it?)" Again, I don't think there's much of a reason to distinuish these things too much because they're different aspects of constructing a work of audience. The "experience" of the work is part of the impression left on a mind by the way a work of authorship bounces off our brain as a stimulus. That impression is the work of audience, whether it's good or bad or deep or shallow or anything else in the eyes of someone else. And regardless of the way that the person experience the work, by the way. It doesn't matter if they experienced it in the way that someone else would prefer (unabridged, in the native language, live on stage, with friends, at the movies). To the person who made the work of audience, it is their work of audience. The only way to change it is to do more labor thinking about it more (maybe with the help of another's analysis) or experience the work again. Maybe in a different way this time.*

*Ms. Alward wrote a more on in the margins of this paper than my other ones. They're good questions. When I say Balkin thinks "negatively" of progressive/republican thought, she offers "Is it a negative assessment? Or does he think only that the view is too narrow? (And is the distinction I'm making clear?)" Probably just narrow. When I say "not incontrovertibly," she asks "Is this the word you want? If so, are you calling into question the name that he's adopted, his explication of the theory, or something else?" I probably meant to call into question that the theory's validity, which wasn't necessary. When I said that there was a difference in value between political and non-political speech, she said "So here's a question: If some speech is more valuable than others (and I think more people would think that, in some sense, some is more valuable), then does that speech deserve greater protection? Should we go to greater lengths to issue access to it? If so, how do we do that and how do we decide? If not, why not?" On this, I'm more skeptical that some information is worth more than others, but perhaps that's because I trust people to be constructing works of audience anyway. The quality of the speech doesn't really matter at the point that someone would incorporate outright horrible speech into their memeplex. On the access point, I think it gets pretty irrelevant once the information is public domain. A very large amount of racist content is public domain. Access to it cannot be restricted. The longer that we keep information out of the public domain, the more fraught that restriction becomes on the grounds of access. It's just the Lindy Effect. Information that has remained valuable longer is more likely to be more valuable (probably misstated that a bit, but fine). The longer something is copyrighted as its value ascends, the more costly that copyright becomes in terms of social welfare. That's just another reason to shorten the copyright term to 10 years.* (2020-06-29, during transcription)

-----

(2014-08-04)

As professor Adam Moore once wrote, "It is an obvious truism that the proliferation of computer networks and the digitization of everything not obstinately physical is radically changing the human experience" (172). Not all of these changes have been purely positive. *Digital Nation* is a film by Rachel Dretzin and Douglas Rushkoff, people who are hopeful about the future of technologies like the Internet. Nonetheless, they want to look at the changes that advancement has made to out lives and be appropriately critical. One issue they cover is that things like instant messaging, email, and having information on virtually all topics available via Google is encouraging people to multitask more and more. Why should someone ignore the temptation to read a Wikipedia article while his or her teacher is lecturing?

The documentary features a number of college students who multitask. They were happy with their performance in a highly rated school, and the impression given is that multitasking is an integral part of their lives. One woman said that her teachers "have to accept that we can multitask very well" and says it is "almost unfair" of them to expect students to not do it while in class (Dretzin and Rushkoff). Another student indicates that there is a "mutual understanding" that "we're all so busy that it''s OK if I'm talking to Murph right now and his BlackBerry goes off and he has to start going on it. I'm, like, Well, that's OK because I'm going to do that to him anyways..." (Dretzin and Rushkoff). The purpose of the traditional classroom dynamics is to have students engage in deep study about one subject for a period. Face-to-face communication has always been about connecting with the person in front of us, traditionally. These students, who Rushkoff would identify as digital natives, want large shifts in social dynamics. They are operating with these new social conventions in mind now.

Changes like this are affecting us at more than a personal level, though. There are great societal changes at hand, which a legal scholar named Jack Balkin has tried addressing in his own way. He focuses on the US Constitution and civil liberties, particularly with First Amendment issues, and developed a theory he calls democratic culture. I will show that the distraction faced by multitasking poses a threat to Balkin's model because it creates difficulties for effective use of speech.

Democratic culture is a framework that privileges the rights of individuals to speech and expression not only as a means to the end of a democracy, but as the core of what it means to live in a society that claims to value individuals' contribution to its culture. Moreover, Balkin believes that our understanding of these rights and values is not static. He says that the individual elements of our rights of speech and expression have always existed and always shall exist; however, they have not always been relevant or important. The internet has made several of these elements come to the forefront, mostly those that deal directly with the right to personally participate in culture rather than just consume products of the culture. Balkin claims that, before the rise of the Internet, the mass media had oligopolistic control over exposing people to information. The Internet now allows everyone to speak and find an audience, so people can more effectively communicate ideas outside of mass media and influence culture.

Balkin contrasts his democratic culture with what he calls (not incontrovertibly) the progressive/republican view of free speech, developed in the early Twentieth Century. He thinks negatively of this older model for a number of reasons: it focuses on political speech as the most important form of speech, it views popular culture as unimportant, and it examines mass media more than it does individuals' cultural participation. Democratic culture intends to rectify each of these perceived missteps. It recognizes all speech as having comparable value because "true democracy means allowing people not only to have a say about who represents them in a legislature...but also to have a say about the shape and growth of the culture that they live in..." (328). It recognizes popular culture's profound role in affecting and reflecting the culture of the populace because "...popular culture and entertainment should not be merely peripheral or a distraction. They should be a central part of what freedom of speech is about" (329). It recognizes the right of every individual to participate in a discourse affecting his or her own culture because "Freedom of speech is more than a choice of which media products to consume. Freedom of speech means giving everyone...the chance to use technology to participate in their culture" (331).

All three of these aspects of democratic culture, if they are to produce the optimistic outcome that Balkin clearly anticipates, operate with one implicit assumption in mind: the people participating understand their topics while speaking. If all speech is to have comparable value, does that include speech that is wrong and leads groups of people to objectively incorrect conclusions? Consider the people who believe vaccination causes autism. If popular culture is to be held up to the same standard that political speech is, consider people who care more about whether or not Usagi and Mamoru kiss in *Sailor Moon* than landmark Supreme Court cases. Are they wholly justified in ignoring the latter in favor of only discussing the former because speech on both topics has comparable value? If people do not understand the aspect of their culture that they speak about, their mere participation can be seen as a right in democratic culture. However, does anyone look at the comments on news sites and often come away with the impression that the commenters fully understood the material? They may not have even read the entire article before talking about the issue because that would have taken more time than they were willing to spend. Mere participation does not imply a quality contribution that affects the culture positively.

Balkin would likely read these questions and suspect that I am advocating for the progressive/republican model, since I put political speech above other kinds of speech. In fact, I am, in proad strokes, partial to his views on how democratic culture can improve on the older model. However, he goes too far in his advocacy of non-political speech. He says that "Power to the people--democracy--in its broadest, thickest sense, must include our relationship not simply to the state but to culture as a whole, to the processes of meaning-making that constitute us as individuals" (328). I agree with this statement, and I find his argument for it compelling. It does not follow from this that political speech, which constitutes opinions directly about shifts in the nation or the world, stand on equal footing with non-political speech, which constitutes personal meaning-making. The impact on culture is not the same at all, and recognizing the difference does not endanger the concept of democratic culture at all. In fact, the larger point of contention Balkin is attempting to fix is that non-political speech is treated as "peripheral or supplementary" (327). That can still be done while recognizing that political speech has to take some form of precedence.

The distraction brought about by the digital age's increased multitasking exacerbates the issue of people not taking the time to understand material they speechify about propertly. In* Digital Nation, *a teacher reports about small quizzes that he gives his students to assess their basic understanding of the material. It involves simple questions so fundamental that he believes anyone who is engaging with the material in class should be able to get full marks, yet his students average 75%. That is not actual understanding. In turn, each of democratic culture's three innovations is undermined in the ways described above, making it more difficult for people to participate effectively in Balkin's model.

This is where the distraction harms Balkin's view of democratic culture. His theory is based on people conducting their meaning-making while understanding cultural artifacts and contributing based on that understanding. The makers of *Digital Nation* talk to researchers at the Communication between Humans and Interactive Media (CHIMe) Lab, who are studying the effects of multitasking on Stanford University students. They find that "multitaskers are terrible at every aspect of multitasking" (Dretzin and Rushkoff). The same students who thought they were fantastic at doing several things at one time "...get distracted constantly. Their memory is very disorganized. Recent work [done by the scientists] suggests they're worse at analytic reasoning" (Dretzin and Rushkoff). Each one of these hurts their participation in democratic culture, and it's been shown that people who multitask more are even worse at it than people who do it less frequently (Yardley).

Despite the increase of multitasking behaviors in recent years, the world has also seen large changes take place, certainly helped along by the expansion of communication caused by the Internet. For instance, the growing acceptance of homosexuals. This is in line with democratic culture and people's personal meaning-making affecting the world by changing culture. It could be argued that this reality defeats my premise that multitasking is harmful to democratic culture. However, the acceptance of homosexuals is mostly a moral issue, whatever side one falls on it. Events from years in the past may be influential, such as the Stonewall Riots in the case of gay rights, but it is very possible to reach a valid conclusion without knowing about them. Having opinions on other sorts of issues, such as reforming the United States' medical system, the 2014 Gaza-Israel conflict, or the preservation of capital punishment all require familiarity with years of preceding information and arguments. People who do not have that background knowledge cannot contribute effectively, though they certainly may try, which means they have to do research just in time. If they are not prepared to focus on the issue at hand, they still will not really know what they are talking about. Multitasking, at its core, is a lack of focus. It makes it harder for people to understand issues in advance and pick up necessary information to catch up.

Another criticism I may face is that technology can encourage people to engage with works and ideas in new, deep ways. This is certainly true. *Digital Nation* itself shows schools where technology is used to connect students to material like books, enhancing their interactions. One teacher used social networking to have her students roleplay as characters from *To Kill a Mockingbird* and saw that it helped student understanding. However, they balance this with another concern that I find compelling: it's possible that use of technology in this way may be training people to expect instant gratification in terms of information. They shouw a high school student who says, "I can't remember the last time I read a book" because he is too busy (Dretzin and Rushkoff). There is a whole essay to be written about how multitasking is supposed to allow people to do more with their time and yet the student is still too busy for reading. His solution to not having time to read full works like *Romeo and Juliet* is to read online summaries of them, allowing him to "...read the whole book in a matter of pages...in five minutes" (Dretzin and Rushkoff). I can say categorically that that did not provide him with an understanding of the work of any value that he could share with other people. For instance, a five minute summary of *Romeo and Juliet* would not be able to cover any of the subtlety of the way that the two feuding families address each other, shifting between Shakespeare's signature iambic pentameter and prose according to the situation.

A natural rejoinder is that, even if the student did read the actual text, taking note of such things requires effort they may or may not want to exert. It may also require knowledge they may or may not have while reading. Neither of these points dilutes the fact that noting the style shifts in the text is an aspect of the work that may be understood. It does not matter that the student may not notice that during a reading of the play. He is completely capable of noticing other things, such as whether or not Romeo's friendship with Benvolio is believable to him. Reading summaries instead of the works prevents all potential of noticing anything new in the work, effectively meaning the summary reader is willingly abdicating their opportunity to have an original thought about a work. That is not what participation in democratic culture is about.

That's the crux of the matter: the results of multitasking lead to behavior that is contrary to what democratic culture is supposed to be ablout. The lead scientists interviewed in *Digital Nation* says, "Multitasking could be essentially dumbing down the world" (Dretzin and Rushkoff). The students he studies in *Digital Nation* are at one of the most difficult schools in the country, so he is not saying that lightly. Even if that statement may be too strong, since amid all the world's recent technological and social innovation it strikes as an overreach to say the world could be "dumbing down," it could certainly be dumbing down our speech by degrading our understanding of topics at hand.

## Works Cited
* Balkin, Jack. "Digital Speech and Democratic Culture: a Theory of Freedom of Expression for the Information Society." *Information Ethics: Privacy, Property, and Power*. Ed. Adam D. Moore. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2005. 297-354. Print.
* Moore, Adam D. "Intangible Property: Privacy, Power, and Information Control." *Information Ethics: Privacy, Property, and Power*. Ed. Adam D. Moore. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2005. 172-90. Print.
* Dretzin, Rachel, and Douglas Rushkoff. "Digital Nation: Life on the Virtual Frontier." PBS, 2 Feb. 2010. Web. 04 Aug. 2014.
* Yardley, William. "Clifford Nass, Who Warned of a Data Deluge, Dies at 55." *The New York Times*. The New York Times, 09 Nov. 2013. Web. 04 Aug. 2014.
