# Digital Rights Management: Purposeful, but Abused

*This was the final essay for TCSS 325: Computers, Ethics and Society, which I took with Lori Alward. It was a group project, and a pretty painless one if I remember correctly. Brandon Crawford was a casual friend of mine. We didn't talk a whole lot, but we were cool. We've lost touch. Yeonil Yoo was a Chinese student and I always regretted not talking to him more, to be honest. One of the major times we spoke was at the bus stop and he revealed at the end of it, when my bus showed up, that he was heading back to China. I wasn't sure what to say. I don't remember John Mulvey at all, sorry to say, but I think this was our only interaction.*

*We were allowed to pick whatever topic we wanted for this assignment, which was creating this essay and an oral presentation to go with it. I did the lion's share of the actual writing on the essay, and was happy to do it. They each contributed and I remember the discussions being pretty fruitful. The font size on the final draft is bumped down a bit from the others I wrote for this class, so I'm sure we had plenty to say. A draft of our PowerPoint slides survives in my folder, but it's messy and mirrors the contents of the essay anyway. I do not have a copy of the essay with annotations or a grade by Ms. Alward. The final copy I do have has a number of typographical errors, so I like to think we had a bit more quality control... ^^;* (2020-07-04, before transcribing)

*So, this is a paper from when I didn't know or care nearly as much about copyright, so obviously, it's misinformed on some issues. Copyright doesn't confer ownership over ideas is an obvious one. Another, perhaps a bit less obvious, is that piracy was always common before the internet and that there were many law-abiding pirates. The American copyright laws didn't even consider copyright in foreign works until 1891.*

*I remain critical of Steam holding users hostage with its Subscriber Agreement. Making this paper is what alerted me to that issue. More generally, DRM is only an infringement on the rights of people who buy content legally. There is no justification for it. I foresee problems with the PS5 that's going to come with no disk drive for the same reasons people foresaw the problems with the original plan for the Xbox One, pretty much. It's not a* retention *of power. It's an abuse of the position of power they have over the console to create* new *forms of power to restrict the user. And they're doing it for no other reason than to squeeze more money out of people. It's despicable.*

*Judging by the dates on the Works Cited, we were probably writing this at the last minute. It shows, lol. We didn't make much of an ethical argument. It's more of a litany of grievances. But those grievances are bad enough on their own, so I guess that's OK.* (2020-07-04, during transcription)

-----

(2014-08-20, with Brandon Crawford, John Mulvey, and Yeonil Yoo)

People who create things have certain rights. Among them, enshrined in the American legal system, is the right to own original ideas as intellectual property. The *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* explains intellectual property as a concept that "protects rights to ideas by protecting rights to produce and control physical instantiations of those ideas" (Moore). It allows companies to regulate how their ideas are dispersed, via copyright and patent laws. In the digital age, this has become a more complicated issue. One of the ways companies have tried to curtail illegal copying of products is quite controversial.

Digital Rights Management (DRM), according to the European Standards Committee, is "the management of rights to digital goods and content, including its confinement to authorized use and users and the management of any consequences of that use throughout the entire life cycle of the content" (CEN). Its most common form is as technology that allows publishers and creators to control their digital products after they have been sold. It is bundled with software to make sure that services are provided only to those with legal copies. It locks down pirated, or otherwise illegal, copies.

Consider that, before digital technology, sales would be finished and then a customer would be free to do whatever they wanted with what they purchased. It is understandable, then, that many consumers are not comfortable with DRM. It is a link to the providers dictating that the product cannot be shared, limiting what can be done with something that the customer paid for. Reproducing things was quire time-consuming before computers, and distributing these was also more difficult, so illegal copying wasn't as large a problem before the internet. Back then, copies would not be a large part of the market and legitimate sales would not suffer so much. Digital data can be copied in a few clicks. Copying and sharing is part of the Internet's culture, even. Estimates from 2003 placed annual losses to industries in the billions of dollars (White 7). In light of that, the desire for a way to insure their businesses that are based on intellectual property against illegal copying is understandable. However, the emergence of this new, after-sale relationship between creators and consumers has led to some abuses by the organizations, crossing boundaries and limiting consumers' liberties in inappropriate ways. While we agree that there is a legitimate reason for DRM, we believe that the anticonsumer abuses of it go too far and are unethical. There are also concerns about whether or not DRM is effective. Many types of DRM cover a broad range of digital media including music, films, documents, electronic books, as well as video games. We will discuss DRM use in gaming to focus this discussion. Video games typically have either on-disk DRM or come from a digital distributor, which may be another form of DRM.

There has been success with DRM in the video game industry as companies like Valve Corporation. Valve seems to have taken over much of the PC gaming market with their platform DRM, called Steam and released in 2003. People often forget that Valve's game distribution platform is a form of DrM. In fact, Gabe Newell, head of Valve, acknowledges this openly and criticizes "most DRM strategies" as "just dumb" while promoting Steam as an alternative (Kain). His vision for the platform is to "create greater value for customers through service value" (Kain). After providing a valid e-mail address and agreeing to Steam's Subscriber Agreement, customers are them able to buy licenses to games that they want to play.

Most gamers who use Steam have a favorable opinion of Steam, due to its semi-regular and drastic game sales. Each one of those games had to agree to the site's Subscriber Agreement, and few read that document. Steam's terms include an agreement that the player and Valve "forgo the rights to class action suits" (Steam). A class action is when a group of parties facing the same grievance band together and sue another group. Now, it is unlikely that Valve will get together other game distributors and file a class action against a player. The real purpose behind this clause of Steam's terms is to bind players to a different legal process called arbitration, which has a number of implications. Arbitration is not the same thing as a legal suit: it leads to an out-of-court settlement between two parties, meaning players would not be able to sue together or collaborate. There is also a lower expectation of discovery outside of court, which means Valve would not be compelled to turn over as much information relevant to the case that supports the player's story.

Valve does qualify this arrangement slightly, but in ways that benefit itself. The terms state that, if the complainant sues Valve for less than $10,000, Valve will pay the complainant's attorney fees. This may seem like a kindness. However, this incentivizes the complainant to lowball the amount of money they seek, which is good for Valve. Personal finances would limit how far they would be able to take their case if they seem more than $10,000, and there are no other complainants to share funds with them. Steam's terms also remind players explicitly that they may seek counsel with government agencies and have one file a class action suit on the player's behalf. The probability of this happening is not high.

Failure to accept Steam's Subscriber Agreement after each and every change, regardless of what those changes entail, will lead to immediate account termination. With that, all of a player's purchase history will be irretrievably deleted and, no matter how much they have purchased through the service, all of their games will be gone. This is a very compromising situation for the player: Steam has all the power to begin with, and that they then demand that their customer give up liberties to continue doing business is an abuse of that position. Essentially, they have long-term customers at gunpoint, even with other gaming options besides Steam available, like consoles.

The radical software distribution changes over the last ten years have changed the landscape for brick-and-mortar game sales. As online downloads gain more and more prominence, it has gotten easier and easier to simply download pirated games for free and use them in consoles rather than buying game disks in stores. At the unveiling of the Xbox One, Microsoft was proud of new policies aimed at dealing with this problem. However, the policies were very controversial, since they would have changed the way people own games in a fundamental way. The backlash against them ended up preventing Microsoft from implementing this form of DRM, but it is still significant as something they considered very thoroughly.

Unlike traditional video game consoles that use disks to play games, Xbox One would have utilized disks solely for installing the game to the console's hard drive. After game installation, the software would have been tied to the user's Xbox Live account and only available to that user's account, which is similar to how a Steam account works. If the user would have wanted to take the game over to a friend's house to play it, the game owner would need to sign in. If they wanted to play a game owned by their friend or borrow it for a weekend, then the owner would have been required to share his or her personal Xbox Live account with someone else. The idea was that the friend may be interested in playing the game as well and while it's on their console it will automatically install. After that installation, the person who owns the Xbox would be able to play it without the game owner's credentials if they purchased the game in the Live marketplace. Even though the game would have already existed on the console.

This also led to questions about how used games would be handled, and Microsoft was not very forthcoming at first. They later disclosed that used games would require an unlocking fee. Several problems with this method were apparent immediately, such as the issue of pricing. If the fees were too small, it would be easy to effectively clone games for cheap. However, if the fees were too high, then sharing would be unreasonable. This would also be a hindrance to used game sales at stores, as this fee would inevitably be accounted for in pricing at used game retailers like GameStop.

Xbox One also had another DRM method that required a system check every twenty-four hours. This would have ensured that the Xbox was not being tampered with and did not have illegal software installed. Mcrosoft's brief comments on it stated it would not have to be "always on" but still would require it to check in once every day in order to play games. This includes games played offline as well. This causes consumers to complain as not all of them have internet connected to their Xbox nor choose to do so. Without a successful internet check, the Xbox One would have been a brick, effectively.

While there has been much speculation on what would have taken place, Microsoft never fully disclosed their original policy as it was dropped due to the severe backlash of negative feedback from consumers before it was officially established. Microsoft decided to reverse their direction of restrictions along with other features such as friends downloading other games to play if they pay.  Brian Blau, a research director at Gartner said this was a good move stating "This has improved the overall impression that some may have had about Microsoft being a bully when it comes to video game DRM" (Blau). All of these issues with Xbox One were hindrances to the consumer brought about by DRM implementation, usually requiring that legal players pay extra in terms of money or time to enjoy their games.

There are ideas about how to reform DRM practices out there. Peter Glaskowsky is a computer architect who believes that "If ever a technology were introduced prematurely, it was digital rights management" (Glaskowsky). Amidst popular calls to completely stop using DRM, he recommends ways to make DRM more efficient while furthering property right protection. One approach could be to use secure hardware components to connect to authentication servers in a way that there is no accessible pathway for carrying decrypted data. Another option is to encrypt each copy separately in order to limit similarities in decryption. Finally, the authentication process could use a secure channel for communication between DRM hardware and authentication servers transferring only necessary information to play the game on that device. The last one is what was attempted by Microsoft, several years after Glaskowsky made the suggestion, and the reaction to implementing this with video games were described above. Glaskowsky is also aware of the "social drawbacks" of DRM, how it inconveniences people who did nothing wrong (Glaskowsky). He says that "I think we'll find that some--perhaps most--kinds of digital content can be profitable even without effective DRM," but takes solace in the fact that "Just because something's possible doesn't mean it's necessary...bit if DRM is necessary, at least it's possible" (Glaskowsky).

To us, that summarizes our position quire nicely. We agree that the concept of internet-based digital distribution for Digital Rights Management has merit because the people who make things and distribute them digitally do have rights. Organizations should be dealt with fairly by people, who are in no way entitled to pirate works simply to avoid paying for the works of others. It follows that organizations should be able to protect the things they create and sell digitally. However, DRM is justified by companies wanting their own rights respected, yet the implementations aubuse their positions of power and strain consumer rights. This is not condonable, either, and incredibly hypocritical. Companies must either take proactive steps to protect and respect the customer's rights or stop the hypocrisy and give up DRM.

## Works Cited
* CEN, *Digital Rights Management Final Report* 2003. Web. 19 Aug. 2014.
* Glaskowsky, Peter. "The Future of DRM." *CNET* CNET, 10 Sept. 2007. Web. 19 Aug. 2014.
* Goldfarb, Andrew. "Microsoft Details Xbox One Used Games, Always Online." *IGN*. 6 June 2013. Web. 19 Aug. 2014.
* Kain, Erik. "'Witcher 2' Developer: 'We Will Never Use Any DRM Anymore.'" *Forbes* Forbes Magazine, 8 Mar. 2012. Web. 19 Aug. 2014.
* Moore, Adam. "Intellectual Property." *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. Edward N. Zalta. Ed. 8 Mar. 2011. Web. 20 Aug. 2014.
* Steam. "Steam Subscriber Agreement." *Steam*. Valve Corporation, 2012. Published. Web. 19 Aug. 2014.
* Stuart, Keith. "Xbox One DRM Restrictions Dropped After Gamer Outcry." *Theguardian.com*. Guardian News and Media, 19 June 2013. Web. 19 Aug. 2014.
* White, Blake. "Digital Rights Management: An Ethical Approach to Resolving Engineering Controversy." Stanford University, Stanford, CA. 5 June 2003. Lecture. MS PowerPoint.
