# Veteran Status as a Signifier of Manhood in *No-No Boy* and *In Our Time*

*I wrote this for "Themes of American Literature" with Dr. Chamberlain. I have some quizzes from the class, but they were mostly just uninteresting questions to make sure that we did the reading. They required so little thought that I'm not going to transcribe them. Same for most of the midterm exam. However, in that midterm exam, I found this essay. It was composed in the moment, with a tiny mindmap, and has some sentences scribbled out accordingly. It is handwritten on ruled paper in pen.* (2020-11-09, before transcription)

*This essay was mostly harmless. It forshadows some of the ideas in my racist paper about racism between non-white groups later in that quarter, but it doesn't lean so hard in that direction. Other than that, I like the recognition of the difference between the expectations of soldiers and their actual lives. Now, I say "I'm not anti-soldier; I'm anti-war," since I don't dislike soldiers as human beings but I hate what their job entails. Ideally, if we are to have a military, the military should be a custodial staff that tends to bases and pays a good wage and provides good benefits. That's the only thing a military is good for.*

*Other than that, Dr. Chamberlain gave this paper a 94/100. Most of his comments were general affirmsations. He said "Well done, Mike! This shows great thought and effort. In the future, just be a bit more specific and try to address your examples a bit more." On the other parts of the quiz, I only missed one other point, because I identified "Mr. Morrison was a character in *No-No Boy* by John Okada," which made me chuckle a bit. Overall, I got 249/250 points because of an extra credit section. (2020-11-09, during transcription)

-------

(2014-02-03)

Ernest Hemingway and John Okada were both United States veterans. This experience was a great influence on both of their works, though the aspects of it that they chose to focus on in their books, Hemingway's *In Our Time* and Okada's *No-No Boy*, were quite different. Whereas Hemingway chose to focus on those who fight in wars, primarily, and the aftermath of that, Okada chose to look at the experiences of a character who refused the draft. Both writers maintained a similar thesis, in the end: war is not something that should be glorified because this mindset is harmful when people are expected to fight to prove themselves.

*In Our Time* is a series of short stories with overarching themes that, when read as a whole, Hemingway wants people to consider. The vignettes that deal with war directly, and have soldiers, tend to be the most disconnected from each other, comparatively. Nonetheless, the overarching themes hold true. Several times within the book, men are depicted as relishing combat, but something is always eerie about them. The captain in the opening story is depicted as so desensitized to the ravages of war that he considers mothers giving birth without aid and the dismemberment of animals "a pleasant business" (14). The "Chapter VI" interlude depicts a character named Nick Adams so concerned with proving how brave he is to his fellow soldier that he cares more about speaking profoundly than the fact that he was shot in the spine. In "A Soldier's Home," the solder, Krebs, feels so insecure about his exploits not being that exciting that he begins to lie to people about them to garner praise and attention. All of these show someone essentially putting on a brave face because it is what is expected of them. THe American culture they grew up in instils this notion that men should boldly protect others and hide their own emotions—which we see depicted when Nick breaks up with his girlfriend because she doesn't need protection and proceeds to hide his feelings of regret from his best friend. Hemingway extends that idea to our views of those who have gone to war—they are venerated as heroes, and are expected to act in a heroic manner. It is expected of veterans that they have fun war stories to tell and that they will come back from war as they were when they left, but this does not always happen. This hero worship leads people to act unnaturally in the face of danger, in Hemingway's view.

In John Okada's *No-No Boy*, we see a continuous narrative that primarily follows a "no-no boy," a Japanese-American citizen who refused to forswear any loyalty to Japan and sign up for the draft. The titular no-no boy, Ichiro Yamada, regrets his decision immensely. He realized that by refusing any alligeance to Japan—which he only felt because of the influence of his mother—he had forsworn his oaths to America—the place where he was born. The guilt over refusing to fight makes him shut down when he returns home. He complains at length about how he should have served and, by not serving, he forfeited his right to be a citizen, practically to be a person.

While the guilt was destroying Ichiro, the Japanese-Americans who had served in the war were behaving as though this service would elevate them above racism because they had confirmed themselves in the eyes of their peers—or so they thought. Racism against Japanese-Americans from other races and racism from Japanese-Americans to other races was still going on. The difference was that now ties among the Japanese-American community were being split based on service. In the end, this elitism means nothing, but, while the violence against no-no boys would be considered heinous, this air of status above other citizens is what is promised to veterans, our heroes.

Everyone in this situation is being harmed in some way. THey have been taught all their lives to expect a change of treatment towards them and to become something more upon becoming a veteran, but the reality is not so glorious. Both show characters coming to terms with their war-related grievances. In Hemingway, we see Krebs feel so disenfranchised by his lack of a welcome home (he came back late) that he lies about his experiences. This his lies are enough for people and even other soldiers causes him anguish. Meanwhile, he is also struggling with an inability to connect to his own family, whom he lives with instead of moving out. He is stuck in a limbo of arrested development so tightly that when he upsets his mother he acts like a child to make her stop crying. Of Okada's characters, of particular interest is Kenji, a Japanese-American who served with distinction in Italy and who dies of a war wound after coming home. He not only died of that wound, which could be seen as spiritual as well as physical, but he also felt very guilty about killing Germans in Italy, even though that is a large part of what a veteran does. He channeled this war guilt positively by helping Ichiro recover from his depression and advocating that people stop caring about demonyms so that people could live more harmoniously. Even though the would eventually claimed his life, Kenji was always striving to work past his situation.

That hits upon the key to both books' motivations regarding their depictions of veterans. It is clear that neither author hates veterans. They wish to call attention to the issues that people face so the issues within the culture that glorifies war to a fault might be mended.  In Hemingway's work, Nick recovers from his spinal injury and goes on to lead an overall happy life. His final story has him alone in the woods enjoying the time alone and making his own way. The main arc of Okada's novel deals with Ichiro the no-no boy learning to live within a culture in which many feel like they cannot accept him because of what he did. The authors wish to call attention to the issues that people face in cultures that glorify war to a fault so the problems may be acknowledged and mended, and they do believe that the wounds can heal.
