# Discussion Forum 2: *No-No Boy*

*In "Themes of American Literature" with Dr. Chamberlain, we had a discussion forum set up on Canvas every few weeks. There were four of them. I found the hand-written first draft of the second one in my notebook. There are a few sentences scribbled out. The date came from the class schedule.* (2020-11-10, before transcription)

---------

(2014-01-25)

* What do you think Okada is implying about this relationship?
* Why is this friendship significant?

Early in the book, Ichiro visits the University of Washington to reconnect with his past life as a student. In the pursuit of this, he meets witht one of his teachers from before the war, Professor Baxter Brown, who welcomes him back "energetically" and takes initiative by extending his arm for a handshake (55). He tries to remember Ichiro's name as a show of familiarity, but cannot quite get it and Ichiro tells him, though he says "Another minute and I would have had it" (55). Yamada is being quite magnanimous and is almost jovial here, but Ichiro is far more reserved. In the end, Ichiro is "ushered to the door" and he reflects on why he was unable to connect with his old teacher. He acknowledges that Brown "was nice enough. Shook hands, talked, smiled," but he still feels uneasy because "It was like meeting someone you know in a revolving door...I was seeing in that meeting, talking without hearing, smiling without feeling" (57). In the end, Ichiro concludes that Brown  was not to blame for this because "It is I who reduces conversation to the inconsequential" (57).

This interaction is very significant, as it is the first time in the novel where someone who is neither Ichiro's relative or Japanese tries to show kindness to Ichiro. In that way, Brown is nearly as significant as Mr. Carrick, though his scene is shorter. He is wholly willing to converse with Ichiro, asking him about his life during the intervening years and trying to offer Ichiro advice for when he comes back to school. It is our first sign that the world may not be as black and white as Ichiro thinks, that the novel is acknowledging that Ichiro does have chances for redemption, but he is not ready for that so soon. He responds to Brown's friendly inquiries, saying "Fine, sir," "Yes," and "No, sir, not so much, that is." Okada is showing us that Ichiro is right that he is the one reducing the conversation, and he realizes this, but Ichiro is unwilling to fix this flaw because he believes it is endemic and that he has "forfeited" his old life and "[has] lost the right to see and hear and become excited over rthings that are in the wonderful past." This is where Ichiro is wrong. Later in the novel, he realizes this and comes to believe that living happily in the world with other people is "a matter of attitude. Mine needs changing. I've got to love the world the way I used to. I've got to love it and make people feel good, and feeling good wil make life worthwhile" (209). The significance of this revelation at the end of the story is partly set up by Ichiro's meeting with Brown.
