# Adam Moore's Intangible Property

*Another paper for Ms. Lori Alward's TCSS 325: Computer Ethics. When I was in school, I would recycle paper out of the recycling bin for my class binders. I turned them over and 3-hole-punched them so that the blank side was on the right. The ones I used for this paper's notes were evaluation forms for a school trip to Point Defiance Zoo & Acquarium. There is a craft store right next to the University of Washington, Tacoma, called Tinkertopia that sells used binders on the cheap. Way less expensive than buying the official UW merch. And, more than that, writing on only one side makes my binders much easier to search for information. It's not even a waste because the other side has been used! Go Green, kids!*

*This essay allowed us to choose between three different topics. The first was explaining Tom Palmer's and John Easterbrook's view on the natural law theory of property and why Easterbrook believed the theory could encompass intellectual property while Palmer did not. The second was explaining what Adam Moore meant by "intangible property" and why Moore thought we must have rights to control some kinds of intangible property. The third was to choose an example of intellectual property and explain why it is intellectual property, justifying it in various ways with Utilitarianism and Kantian perspectives.*

*I obviously chose the second option. This is more than likely the first essay I ever wrote specifically on the topic of intellectual property and I know that it does include references to copyright. I'm beyond intrigued to understand my thoughts from that time better, as I had not yet become enlightened to the copyleft side of things. I believed in the naive copyright maximalism we're indoctrinated into from childhood. I believed that creators were threatened by piracy, for God's sake. It was a terrible time.*

*I skimmed the copy of the article I read back then and my notes don't indicate my position. My gloss on the article, not having read it in depth, is that I'm skeptical of the supposed value of characterizing information about a person as that person's property. Property can be alienated and traded, creating the potential for a market. I do not think a market in personal information would be worthwhile. It would essentially give the most powerful companies on earth, run by vectoralists, even more power. But maybe he addresses this at some point. Separately, the article by Tom Palmer I write about in this article was probably the first serious critique of intellectual property I ever read. I think about the example of a singer being prevented from using their body to sing a song all the time, although his assertion that this means the real property claimed by copyright is the musician's body got lost along the way. That's an interesting idea.* (2020-06-28, before transcription)

*I corrected typoes in this because they interrupted the flow. Ms. Alward also corrected some in red pen. ^^;*

*I think I remember this class putting some initial cracks in my reflexive copyright maximalism now. Maybe this was even the subconscious reason I stole that copy of* The Public Domain *by James Boyle, haha. I like that I made the point about the restriction of people's bodies and that I did not use the word "protect" to describe any of this. Intellectual property does not protect. It restricts. Also good to see that I thought copyright lasted too long!*

*My sincere belief in the notion that copyright actually addresses the problem that "people need to eat" (as opposed to sending wealth up towards the top of the property pyramid) is deeply cringey and funny to me now. But, overall, I don't find this paper objectionable. It's merely wrong.*

*There are some notes in the margins from Ms. Alward, telling me that I could expand things. I agree with her. I wonder if the brevity of this paper was connected to my MSL job at all. Where I said that information is "not inherently discovered," she circled the word "inherently," put an exclamation point by it, and wrote "Is this what you meant?" There's also a longer note here that reads "Are there other responses? e.g., is it possible to argue AGAINST Palmer's claim--say that it's not a restriction on liberty in the way that he claims--rather than saying, well, you're right, but we want people to invent things, so we're going to restrict liberty?" And, uh, modern Mike says "No," even if that's cheeky.*

*The grade is a 3.7 out of 4. "Excellent work. Very well written. The main thing I'd like to see you do in future essays is to expand certain key arguments or claims. Both arguments and counterarguments could be more fully developed." I struggle with this to this very day...* (2020-06-28, during transcription)

-----

(2014-07-23)

Adam Moore is a philosophy professor from the University of Washington, who specializes in, among other things, information policy. In the essay "Intangible Property: Privacy, Power, and Information Control," he develops his conception of what intangible property is and why he believes that it merits property rights similar to those of tangible property. That is, Moore believes that this intangible property can be owned. I will explain this theory and show why I also believe it to be true.

Moore's argument that people should have rights to control their intangible property stems from his comparison of intangible property to the more conventional tangible property. Intangible property is often marked by physical tokens, such as lists or digital records. Moore uses a Lockean property model for rights determination because of this, asserting that to put in labor to create the property earns a person rights to decide what is done with that property. The thinking of the idea was inherently laborious, so Moore believes that the comparison is valid.

Intangible property includes a number of sets of things that can be acquired. Broadly, it includes three domains of things: "ideas yet to be discovered," ideas yet to be created," and "intangible works that are privately owned" (174). The last section is known otherwise as intellectual property, the uniquely owned, creative work of minds. This is the purview of copyrights (for stories, characters, or names) and patents (for inventions or processes), which allow the exclusive use of these ideas by the people who created them. There is much debate about how intellectual property should be enshrined in the law, if at all. It is both criticized as immoral and held up as a basic extension of Lockean principles that support tangible property rights.

The immorality criticism comes from the fact that someone can claim something that is the result of a bodily action as intellectual property and restrict it. This leads to situations in which people are not allowed to move their own bodies in certain ways if a dance is copyright, or singing a certain song may be restricted if the song is copyrighted. Some, such as liberty advocate Tom Palmer, go even further and claim that patented processes are "a restriction on the liberty of everyone who wanted to make an abacus with their own labor out of wood they legitimately owned" (134). A common response to this objection is to discuss incentives. If creators' ideation does not warrant some exclusivity that they could use to generate wealth for themselves, there would be less incentive to create at all. This may be seen as selfish, but it is really just an acknowledgment that people need to eat and being the only one garnering money from an invention is an effective way to assure that happens.

Nonetheless, intangible property does include more than its most famous constituent. Personal information must also be considered, according to Moore. These are facts about people, such as their birthdate or Social Security number. Note that these are not inherently discovered or acquired, unless revealed by someone, usually the person whose information is in question. He takes the power that ownership of such information grants as "obvious," especially in the hands of someone other than the relevant person (173). As an example, he invites readers to "think of how governments could use such information to control populations or political opponents, or how insurance companies could use such information" (173). He sees value in keeping control of these sorts of things.

As mentioned above, its proposed components have legitimate detractors of their own. That they should be treated the same way as physical property is another point of contention on top of that. Moore does not address this criticism directly, exactly. He relies on the axiomatic obviousness of the value of this information in terms of privacy, addressing that term at length. He believes this to such a degree that he believes that a new restriction on the First Amendment is in order, one saying that "we cannot publish sensitive personal information without permission" (185). Though, that runs into its own issues when one considers that perhaps revealing that information would be in the public interest. This gets back into the criticism of intellectual property about it restricting the rights of others.

Despite these objections, I find Moore's reasoning compelling. A major part of his argument is that tangible property rights are prima facie claims, or considered valid on principles until proven otherwise. People who work to come up with original ideas, whether wholly original or combining existing ideas, deserve recognition for those contributions. It should be their place to decide how the ideas are used for a period of time out of deference to that. While the current system configuration leaves them far too much time, the principle that they should get some exclusive time is not damaged by that.

If a prima facie claim is valid until proven otherwise, I believe it would be fair for a system respecting intellectual property to remain unless and until a better system is devised to replace it. In that vein, I also think it is fair to extend that to general intellectual property, since protecting personal information is so important in this digital age. We live in a world where knowing someone else's numbers or other personal information is enough to impersonate someone else, causing great fiscal harm to the appropriated person. There should be protections built into  our principles of law to alleviate this newly common phenomenon. The argument for intangible property rights is all about the protection of people, which is a noble thing to strive for.

*(The citations in this essay come from* Information Ethics: Privacy, Property, and Power, *edited by Adam D. Moore. The specific articles were "Are Patents and Copyrights Morally Justified?" bu Tom G. Palmer (pp. 123-168) and "Intangible Property: Privacy, Power, and Information" by Adam D. Moore (pp.172-190).)*
