# The Right Privacy Rights

*This is the fourth paper I wrote for TCSS 325: Computers, Ethics and Society under Lori Alward. It was the final solo paper. There were two topic choices. First, compare the Warren & Brandeis privacy model grounded in personhood to the control-based definition developed by Adam Moore. Second, using an article we read in class, discuss what respecting people's privacy rights means to you as a professional software developer. How might a software engineer violate those rights, or prevent/avoid such a violation. I chose the first topic.*

*The first thing I notice is that I didn't have all that much to say about this. The rough draft is only one and a half pages, albeit very incomplete and scrawled with notes for how to continue. The mind maps I made for the project are quite sparse. And, although the final draft runs to three pages, I used a different font than my other essays for this class. I'm sure it has a larger gutter. Although, since I turned this in less than a week after the third essay, I bet I just ran out of time somehow. It's three pages and barely sneaks onto the fourth. I guess Ms. Alward let that slide.* (2020-06-30, before transcribing)

*Ms. Alward corrected me calling Warren & Brandeis a "law review" to "law review article," and I was going to correct it here, but I refer to their paper as a "review" later on as well. Oops, haha!*

*There is a lot of assuming in this paper. No doubt I am rushing to get through it. Ms. Alward left notes in places where I could have expanded it. At the end of the first paragraph, where I say "each individual is entitled to an 'inviolate personality,'" she adds "or do we have the involate personality, which groudns the entitlement to privacy? i.e., is 'involate personality' similar to Kant's notion of 'humanity in the person'--something we necessarily have in virtue of being persons?" When I talk about the difficulty of enforcing privacy laws (goood job Past Mike; stay that little bit woke), she opines "Interesting distrinction--it raises the question of how privacy laws would be enforced under B&W's concept of privacy. If it's a civil violation (like slander & libel), then in a [case?], enforcement is still up to the individual since you'd have to bring a lawsuit to redress the wrong.*" Additionally, she thought my observation that both definitions require context to evaluate scenarios was a "nice point."

*The score was 3.7 out of 4, with the note "Excellent work!" Seems pretty basic and inoffensive to me, and I'd rather it be that than terrible.* (2020-06-30, during transcription)

-----

(2014-08-11)

The law did not consider legal guarantees of privacy rights directly before the late Nineteenth Century. In 1890, Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis wrote a law review called "The Right of Privacy" that proved to be influential and succeeded in bringing people to view privacy as protectable by the law. It did so by noting the extension of common law doctrine regarding life to recognizing sensations as property, and then extending that principle to general property, both tangible and intellectual. In this way, the law would defend people against sensations such as emotional harm from publishing personal correspondence in newspaper gossip columns alongside more established violations like battery. The justification is ultimately that this right to not have your personal information published without consent is distinct from private property rights; instead, each individual is entitled too an "inviolate personality" (216).

In the century since that review's publication, people's lives have altered drastically. Whereas Warren and Brandeis were concerned about nonconsensual publication in the press, one of the more modern definitions of privacy comes from a different concern. Adam Moore control definition of privacy, which says that one should have "control over access to oneself and to information about oneself" (252). The paper in which he wrote that is concerned with the ethics of employee monitoring, which is fitting because he comes at it from a concern about that situation. The definition need not be specific to that situation, no more so than Warren and Brandeis's is specific to newspapers, but it also attempts to solve a problem. The control definition, as the inviolate personality definition before it, seeks to describe how we as people are comfortable with others being involved in our affairs.

As attempts to describe the same thing, both the inviolate personality and control definitions cover much of the same ground. Nonetheless, it is natural to think that there is one best definition for a word, so it follows that we may want to decide which of them is most accurate. I will argue that control is best because it answers modern privacy needs whereas the recognition of inviolate personality does not meet those needs.

Both personality and control conceptions of privacy are used in response to certain societal problems. This implies that a certain level of context is significant when reading either definition. Warren and Brandeis were concerned about newspaper publications, while more, who did not create the control definition, is concerned about employees' rights. The inviolate personality definition is very much a product of its time, when instant cameras were not very common and it took a lot more effort to intercept personal notes. It may still be valid in terms of journalism, since distribution of news is still so widespread with the Internet, but consider the situation of someone taking photos while on vacation at a popular destination. If someone takes a picture of a monument and someone else is in frame, has that nonconsensually photographed individual's privacy been violated? That seems unlikely, since the photo would be kept for the photographer's own sentimental value. It would become their own private property. Meanwhile, the control definition suits the photographed party while not condemning the photographer. The photographed person does maintain control over their person; they are relaxing that control by being in a very public place. That is their own choice. If the photographer does something egregious while that control is loosened, such as take a photo under a woman's skirt, the photographed person can strengthen their control at their whim.

Inviolate personality also places the accountability of maintaining privacy rights at the feet of a high-level principle and enforcement by the law as the final arbiter. People violate principles for trivial reasons all the time because if they break it the person who they imposed upon is not empowered to do anything about the violation. The control definition, on the other hand, makes the individual accountable for his or her own privacy. They control it and they can speak up when impositions occur. For instance, if they are not comfortable having their picture taken by an innocuous photographer, they can ask that whatever photos someone just took with them in it be deleted. If the pictures are not destroyed, they can move on to legal procedures if they so desire. In this case, it is more than the photographed person asking them to delete the picture. It is them asserting their control.

In regards to correspondence, the situation has also changed. We now have email, which is not a secure way to communicate but is used frequently by the majority of people instead of physical mail. Warren and Brandeis said that "the right to privacy ceases upon the publication of the facts by the individual, or with his consent," and it is all too common for people to click "reply all" when responding to emails. This publicizes the information within the email, but would it then be right for an accidental receiver to publish that information if it is not of general interest? It would not be OK. There may be cases where that accidental receiver may use the information for their own legitimate purpose, such as proof of wrongdoing or an affair, but it is not theirs to publish without reason. The sender maintains their control over the information within.

This is the Twenty-First Century and there is not call for us to be shackled to a definition of privacy from the Nineteenth Century. The situation has changed, and that definition no longer represents our modern privacy expectations. We have other definitions like the control definition that reflect those expectations, so control should be used over inviolate personality.

*(All citations are to* Information Ethics: Privacy, Property, and Power, *edited by Adam D. Moore. The essays cited were "The Right to Privacy" by Samuel Warren and Louis D. Brandeis (pp. 209-225) and "Employee Monitoring: Evaluative Surveillance v. Privacy" by Adam D. Moore (pp. 251-264).)*
