*From my first quarter at the University of Washington, Tacoma. The class was "Themes of American Literature" and the focus was on Masculinity as a theme. Extremely interesting class that I learned a lot from. I always felt odd about never talking to the professor much again after finishing it. But that's just a consequence of them teaching so many classes, I suppose. This was for some online discussion forum. (2018-11-21)*

-----

(2014-02-23)

>Option B: For this option, please consider how the text presents the issues of gender and masculinity. In this case, you could **examine how men demonstrate their masculinity**, or how men interact across gender lines with women, among others.
>
>* What do you think the text is suggesting about these topics? 
>
>* How does the text portray the experience of gender and masculinity? 

# Option B, Examine how men demonstrate their masculinity 

In the short story “Drown” by Junot Diaz, the male narrator is touched by his male best friend, Beto. While it’s happening, the narrator says “What the fuck are you doing?” and was “too scared to watch” (104). He “suddenly…wanted out” after he came (104). It’s clear that this was completely non-consensual, yet the narrator did not resist physically, even when Beto did this to him a second time. The story does not state why the narrator stayed around Beto directly, but the implication is clear. 

He was “terrified that [he] would end up an abnormal, a fucking pato…” (104). What the reader will notice first is that the reason he is terrified of this outcome is that his culture has told him this outcome would make him “abnormal.” This may lead the reader to think that, on some level, the narrator wants this kind of relationship with Beto, but that is not the case. The narrator says that “but [Beto] was my friend and back then that mattered to me more than anything. This alone got me out of the apartment and over to [where Beto waited] that night” (104). Romantic interest in Beto is not what got him out of his basement. The narrator felt obliged to stay with Beto because of their friendship. The will to be loyal to his friend outweighed his feelings of revulsion and shame over the molestation and lead him to maintain the association. This kind of loyalty, especially among male friends, is an expected demonstration of masculinity taken to an extreme because the narrator did not really have any other close friends during the flashbacks and had not made any new ones in year since. All of the other kids at the pool are nameless or people he sells drugs to, and when he visits in the present he is upset that “[he’s] not the oldest motherfucker there, but it’s close.” 

The other part of the reason he stayed with Beto was the pressure to keep up a façade that nothing was wrong. Men are supposed to be stoic and not show when things upset them. Instead of speaking out to anyone about how he felt, including Beto when he offered to stop during the second incident, the narrator internalized his emotions and retreated. For instance, he went to the basement and he maintained resentment towards Beto for the entire year without telling his mother why. He tried to explain himself in “wise-like” terms that amounted to the half-truth that “everything changes,” but that is not letting her know what went on (95). Had he spoken up, she would not have said “that sort of saying is only around so you can prove it wrong” and would not have pressed him about something so traumatic for her son, but she did not know that it was traumatic. Still, perhaps part of this reservation is shame and fear of the “pato” label. 

In the end, it’s shown that Beto gave the narrator a book before leaving town, and the narrator get rid of it instantly. Now that Beto was leaving and they would no longer associate, the narrator cut all ties. The friendship was no longer there for him to lean on, but neither was it there to make him feel obligated to sit by while Beto touched him. It is significant that the narrator finds solace in a new primary connection after Beto’s departure, and that he finds solace in it. His mother and he watch TV together, she does not betray his trust, “and the two hours together make us friendly” (107). The narrator is shown with a relationship that is comfortable for both parties without anyone taking advantage of the other, and he is happy with Beto, formerly his best and only friend, out of his life.
