# Different Races, Different Racism: Male-to-Male Examples within *No-No Boy* and its Proposed Solution

*I barely remember writing this paper, much less what it's about. It's the capstone analytical essay for my "Themes of American Literature" class with Dr. Chamberlain. It was the first writing class I took at the University of Washington, Tacoma, during my first semester there.*

*There is a proposal for the essay attached. Dr. Chamberlain seemed to like the general thrust of my idea. It has a thesis paragraph at the top that says "There are as many forms of racism in the world as there are races that discriminate and races discriminated against. People tend to focus upon racism from white people to other races as a generalization. This is a myopic view of the problem that does not really grasp the problem. However, American literature comes from a culture that has been very aware of and, on a number of levels, ashamed of the racism in its past. It affords us a number of interesting lenses to look at these problems."*

*Fuck.*

FUCK.

*I don't need to tell you that comparing prejudices of non-white groups to the prejudices of white people does not make any fucking sense. The non-white people don't have power provided by the system. The prejudices of non-white people are a direct result of being born into a racial caste system that they must then navigate, and that racial caste system was created by the Portugese to justify enslaving people who had darker skin.*

*The most important note from Dr. Chamberlain is at the end of the proposal. "Hi Mike-- This proposal shows good thinking about the texts. You're headed in a good dircetion here, and I believe you have done well. Mainly, I would encourage you to think about how you could integrate some more of our class's critical frameworks into the discussion. For instance, it would make sense to point to the topic of gender or masculinity, as you suggest. Still, I think you're headed in a good direction here. --Best, EC." The grade at the bottom is 46/50.* 

*This had to be an 8-10 page paper, for fuck's sake. God. The paper itself was meant to be about masculinity in American literature (the class's focus), so I'm not sure how this connects back to that. I'm sure I will find out.* (2020-07-17, before transcription)

*Ugggggggghhhhh. Insufferable wannabe-white bastard. I note that the use of the word *polysemous* in the first paragraph is a reference to the class discussion. On one of the quizzes, he gave 2 extra credit points to people who remembered it.*

*Honestly, just fuck this analysis that rests on the (unstated) premise that racism is just a natural feature of human interaction. Racism was created for a purpose. "The way to overcome all of these is for all races to forgive and workhard to move forward." Fuck off.*

*The Japanese Americans were illegally detained in concentration camps by the American government because the American government has always been run by white racist fuckwads. Fuck this "interned" shit.*

*The notes Dr. Chamberlain left were mostly asking me to expand certain points. His suggestions are good. I feel like most of what I have is padding.*

*It's just so frustrating to read something that views the expressions of racism from non-white people as originating with them when these things are so* obviously *driven by the expectations of a society dominated by white people. Yeah, yeah, "racist agency." Whatever, man. The society is shitty for white people's reasons and they're choosing to go along with it for their own reasons, which don't make a difference to the white people in charge regardless. I'm taking a break.* (2020-07-17, during transcribing.)

*Tanscribed a bit more today, the part about Mike. Bah. Just skimming white people's enaction of the concentation camps by talking about how they turned a Japanese American veteran against the country rubs me the wrong way. It's almost like it's trying to put the focus on the Japanese American at the expense of covering white Americans' brutality.* (2020-07-27, during transcribing)

*Not sure if it's really relevant to what I was thinking while I was writing this, but I did not hyphenate any of the demonyms in the paper, so "Japanese-American" was "Japanese American." I initially decided to fix this because I didn't realize it was so prevalent throughout.*

*Come to think of it, I think I only ever had one black teacher in my entire school career. It was not Dr. Chamberlain. It was the man I took Network Security with, whose name I can't recall offhand. I think all of the writing teachers I ever had were white. I wonder how/if things would have been different if that hadn't been the case.*

*Whew. This paper was also a doozy. I can go a little easier on it than my other racist papers because it is an analysis of a specific book, which necessitates a layer of artificiality and passivity that are inappropriate here. Nonetheless, I disavow it. What did Dr. Camberlain have to say about it? "Hi Mike. This paper shows some good careful thought about the text. I like how you focused on the issues of assumptions and racism. Those are really relevant. I also would just encourage you to analyze a little further. That would help." On the attached evaluation, he gave me a "Very Good" or a mark close to "Very Good" in each of the categories. "Argument, thesis and critical thinking," 46/50; "Organization of essay and ideas," 45/50; "Course concepts, evidence and support," 45/50; "Mechanics, clarity and style," 46/50; "Guidelines, persuasion and audience awareness," 46/50. In total, 228/250 with a "Nice work!" I disagree. But I also wonder how I would handle being given a racist paper as a teacher. Do I refuse to give it a good grade because it has ideas I disagree with? How much of a cop does that make me, even if it's for a good cause and* somebody *should have checked them on racism by college? I don't know. It's a tough position.* (2020-07-28, during transcribing)

-----
(2014-03-03)

When someone is racist, they believe in stereotypes, usually negative, describing a certain race. They abuse the concept of cultural identity, that people within cultures will have similar backgrounds, generalizing in this way. Racists usually do this to set others below themselves within the social hierarchy as circular justification for mistreating people. The most discussed racism in American public discourse involves white people receiving preference over minorities, or non-white people. It is rare to see depictions of racism that stray from this. That is not to imply that racism from whites against minorities is not reprehensible; however, this has become something of a stereotype itself. It is not representative of the problem. In reality, *racism* is polysemous because a person of any race is capable of being racist towards any race, including their own. Additionally, societal situations can influence and foster new, different prejudices, even between people who share social classification, such as men. This means that there are infinitely many possible permutations of racism. To look at racism through a "white versus minorities" lens is to limit our understanding of the societal problem we face.

Despite the stereotyping, forms of racial prejudice have been documented from within minority communities over time. John Okada's novel, *No-No Boy*, provides an interesting depiction of racism, displaying both its polysemy and its effects on people. The novel follows a young Japanese American man named Ichiro Yamada in the aftermath of World War II, during which the American government interned people in America of Japanese descent because it feared their betrayal. The American government demanded that Ichiro, and all other interned men, forswear loyalty to Japan and submit to the American military's draft. He refused both, choosing to go to prison as a titular no-no boy. Over the course of the novel, Ichiro deals with intense depression created from his feeling like he doesn't belong in America because of his choice, which he regrets because he also does not feel loyal to Japan. He has never set foot in that island country. Rather than just focus his attention on the racism from American society, especially white Americans, against Japanese Americans, Okada's work is a powerful demonstration of racism from multiple racial sources. Much of the racism is between men, which would even the field between the parties even in a more ideal world. *No-No Boy* uses this to shed light on not only the need for this white/minority myopia to end, but to show that the way to overcome all of these is for all races to forgive and work hard to move forward.

The first pages of *No-No Boy* have Ichiro meet a friend from before the war: Eto, a Japanese American man who is proud of his choice to enlist. Eto's initial treatment of Ichiro is jovial, calling Ichiro by his childhood nickname, "Itchy," but Eto becomes hostile quickly when "[his] eyes [confront] Ichiro with indecision which change[s] slowly to enlightenment and then to suspicion. He remember[s]. He [knows]." that Ichiro chose to be a no-no boy (Okada 3). This realization is very significant, as Eto saw Ichiro as a fellow American man who had served honorably in the war and came to him as an equal at first. Eto believes that his service in the military has risen him above other Japanese Americans and made him so distinct from his Japanese heritage that he is comfortable using the pejorative "Japs" to refer to those returning from internment camps (Okada 2). He sees his service as proof to the world that he is a man and an American citizen. On the other hand, Ichiro's refusal to serve made him Japanese in Eto's eyes; what's more, it made him less than Japanese because Ichiro was given an opportunity to prove his worth. Eto calls Ichiro a "rotten bastard" and spits on him because he has partitioned this subclass of Japanese American from his own (Okada 4). He has done this so that he can treat them as an acceptable target to dominate. This affirms his belief that he is separated from his Japanese past and shows that he thinks the world will forget what he looks like because of his actions.

Nationalist Japanese American boys who did not fight in the war who did not fight in the war also hold this racist attitude toward no-no boys. Ichiro's brother, Taro, represents them and he is determined to drop out of school to join the military "because Taro hate[s] that thing in his brother which had prevented him from [enlisting]" (Okada 19). "That thing" was the influence of their Japanese nationalist parents, which Taro wants to cancel out in the eyes of others by fighting for America. This is what "makes it so frightfully urgent for [Taro] to get into uniform to frove that [he is] not part of [Ichiro]," and Ichiro is shown to empathize with Taro's decisions, thinking that "if he were eighteen and in Taro's shoes he would probably do the same thing" (Okada 67). Yet Taro chooses to make a statement before he leaves and he lures Ichiro into an ambush and helps other youths assault him (Okada 81). They call him a "Jap" and say he is "just like a dog" while they beat Ichiro, drunk, and threaten him with a knife. This is one of the most physically violent outbursts in the novel, beaten only by another racially charged fight at the end involving Eto, Ichiro, and another no-no boy who was killed during it. These represent the extremes that racism can be taken to and act as warnings. Racism can be especially dangerous when it gets out of people's hands and leads them to do things they can never take back, even if most of it is comparatively benign.

Ichiro also faces racism from a group of African American men that accosts him. As far as American literature and culture go, African American men are the iconic target of racism for good reason. Slavers brought their ancestors to America and were often brutal and cruel masters. After slavery was ended, African Americans were still treated as second-class citizens and it is important to note *[the time when?]* this is book was written. It takes place before the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s. At this point, this African Americans have likely faced racism throughout their entire lives, and the first word any of them say to Ichiro is "Jap" (Okada 5). They act without any knowledge of Ichiro's actions, unlike Eto. This treatment is motivated purely by a desire to place themselves as superior to him because he is Japanese and they are African American. Ichiro's response is to be racist towards them, though not to their faces. Ichiro calls them "friggin' niggers" and a "hate which was unrelenting and terrifying" emerged from "the same place deep down where tolerance for the Negroes and [a number of other races]...abided because he was Japanese and knew what it was like better than did those who were white and average and middle class..." (Okada 5-6).

In the context of these men trying to show their masculinity, this racism is also domination as a demonstration of social advantage. The African American men emasculate Ichiro, a twenty-five-year-old man, by calling him "boy," showing that they consider themselves above him (Okada 5). Eto and Taro's motivations are similar. Club Oriental, both a literal nightclub and a figurative representation of the "Oriental" racial identity, allowed a Japanese American man to bring a white woman as a guest, but denied entry to another with two African American friends. All of these people are creating artificial divisions, but these do not stop the racism these people face from other people who judge them regardless.

*No-No Boy*'s multicolored approach to racism is not an attempt to excuse racism from whites or, more generally, American culture against minorities. There are examples of racism from white s or stemming from prejudicial perceptions of whites. Okada points out that "It's alright to be German and American or Italian and American...but, as things turned out, it [isn't] all right to be Japanese and American. You ha[ve] to be one or the other," discussing at length how he considers Japanese internment to have been a ghastly mistake that lead to more problems than any rationale could justify (Okada 91). When Ichiro's friend tells him the story of a Japanese American World War I veteran named Mike, it is revealed that "when talk [of internment] started, he wouldn't believe it... He thought there might be justification in interning some of the outspokenly pro-Japanese aliens, but he scoffed at the idea of the government doing such a thing to him," yet they came for him as well (Okada 98). Mike "burst into a fury of anger and bitterness and swore that if they treated him like a Japanese, he would act like one" (Okada 98). This treatment from American society, executed by white decision-makers, drove him to identify with the "rabidly pro-Japanese" (Okada 98). He became "a leader in the troublemaking, the strikes, and the riots [at his internment camp]," acting violently with racial pride (Okada 98). He focused on the part of his cultural identity that was still being acknowledged, seeking vengeance for America taking away rights as a citizen because of his race. Eventually, he condemned himself to live in "a country he didn't know or love" when he chose to emigrate to Japan after the war's conclusion (Okada 98). Again, there os a show of racism followed by a display of racial intolerance. As Okada's other male figures, Mike attempted to claim his status and identity in an agnostic way. Okada wants Americans to become "the kind of Americans that Americans always profess themselves to be" by  ending this cycle, so that there could be "no problems for you and me and everybody else" (Okada 169).

Ichiro meets characters who model this ideal from different parts of society, and they try to help him reacclimatize to society while also trying to make up for society's shortcomings. A common theme among these characters is the acknowledgment that America should feel guilty about what it did to Japanese Americans. Mr. Brown, his former professor from the University of Washington, was enthused by Ichiro's visit to the campus, though he believed Ichiro fought in the war. Mr. Carrick says that Japanese Americans have "got a right to be sore" after their treatment because "you fellows are as American as I am. And you've proved it" (Okada 55-6). He provides Ichiro with advice for continuing his education, namely to not retake classes and move forward, symbolic of accepting the break and moving forward in life. Mr. Carrick and Mr. Morrison both offer Ichiro jobs, seeking to employ the Japanese Americans that their fellow citizens refuse to associate with. Carrick is a private-sector engineer with "a heartfelt desire to atone for a big country which hadn't been quite big enough." Morrison runs a charity store, with a fostered sympathy for no-no boys because "there's nothing wrong with you" (Okada 220). Both men had relationships with Japanese Americans before the war. This personal experience humanized the race for them.

Emi and Kenji are Japanese American friends of Ichiro who help him come to terms with his identity throughout the novel. These characters espouse Okada's idealist stance on race relations, which amounts to a policy of forgiveness and not "[letting] there be any Japs or Chinks or Jews or Poles or Niggers or Frenchies, but only people" (Okada 165). That line is from Kenji, who looks at the reintegration of Japanese Americans, sees them reforming communities based around their racial identity, and says, "Pretty soon it'll be just like it was before the war. A bunch of Japs with a fence around them....they screamed because the government said they were Japs and, when they finally got out, they couldn't wait to rush together and prove that they were." He considers this a form of self-discrimination, a race choosing to close itself off from others, and another way to prevent crosstalk between races, which breeds understanding.

This cultural interaction, on a large scale, is called transculturation. It affects people both positively and negatively, based upon whether or not they embrase it. Those who do not accept this process have self-interested reasons for doing so. For instance, the Asian people of Jackson Street and Club Oriental are resistant to change and isolate themselves from people who are different to themselves. It turns out that the people who do accept it still do so out of self-interest, though. They are younger Japanese men like Kenji, whose father noted that "it was because he was Japanese that he...simply stated that he had decided to volunteer for the army instead of being able to wait until...the army called him," and the Japanese fathers, like Kenji's, who want to remain connected to their intercultural children (Okada 120). Kenji, predictably, is a proponent of this and among his last words to Ichiro was advice that he "marry a white girl or a Negro or an Italian or even a Chinese. Anything but Japanese," so that his descendants' blood would be transculturized (Okada 164). While Ichiro takes his words about an ideal world populated by "only people" to heart, he still decides to date Emi at the end of the story, and this suggests that Okada is trying to belie somewhat the idea that people must abandon their own racial identities for the world to be devoid of racism. At least, he is showing that, while race should not determine who you are, it should neither limit who you love.

Ichiro goes on a date with Emi after he has seen Kenji for the last time. They enjoy each other's company. While they listen to a symphony, which is people working together to make music, Ichiro reflects on his journey from depression to contentedness, and makes a resolution:

> Nobody's looking at us twice. Nobody's asking me where I was during the war or what the hell I am doing back on the Coast. There's no trouble to be had without looking for it. Everything's the same, just as it used to be. No bad feelings except those that have always existed and probably always will. It's a matter of attitude. Mine needs changing. I've got to love the world the way I used to. I've got to love it and the people so I'll feel good, and feeling good will make life worthwhile. (Okada 209)

This comes from a Japanese American who has been the target of racism from people of several colors throughout the novel and he is saying that he has to change his own attitude. Remember that he is also guilty of racist behavior, so there is room for him to grow. The reason viewing racism as simply whites against minorities is harmful is because, while it oversimplifies the issue, it removes racist agency from minorities. It allows people to feel a racist situation is unimportant when a white person is uninvolved. Worse, it can lead people to feel like racism from non-whites is not racism, but all forms of racism are harmful to victims. Okada advises that there is a way to overcome this tendency to separate ourselves based on race for pride or want of power. It is to acknowledge that intercultural contact is beneficial to our society and be steadfast in our love for others and ourselves as the people we are.

## Works Cited
* Okada, John. *No-No Boy*. Seattle: University of Washington, 1990. Print.
