# Zuck
*OK, this may be the one artifact that needs the most context in comparison to how inconsequential it is. It's a song that I wrote for my Wookieepedian friend, [Trak Nar](http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/User:Trak_Nar?oldid=5409778).*

*The motivation behind this was* [Star Wars Detours](http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Star_Wars_Detours), *a* Star Wars *comedy show produced by Seth Green announced late in 2012. Still being a Wookieepedian at the time, I was involved in the discussions of how to handle including it, which was controversial because it was planned to have its own continuity and last for a long time. Basically, it was almost as big a deal as the split between the current timeline and Legends, but over a meme show. We were all a little apprehensive about it. Some people thought that we might just include it as its own section under "Behind the scenes", as we treated minor non-canon stuff. Other people wanted to create separate articles distinguished from their counterparts with "(Detours)" tacked on the end, another thing we'd done previously. Some people suggested creating a separate Detours wiki and directing people there. Most of us just thought that [the trailer made the show look terrible](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oMVrMP8us6Q). It was basically a CGI* Robot Chicken *with* Star Wars *characters, but for children. Part of it reimagined Leia as a self-absorbed Valley Girl stereotype. It was weird. In this, I compared it to forum threads on [Waru](http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Waru), which was an trans-dimensional being in one of the infamously disliked books of the original Expanded Universe. EU fans loved to exaggerate how much they loved Waru and pretend to be part of the cult that worshipped him, so the threads could get intense sometimes.*

*It ultimately didn't end up going anywhere because *Detours* was cancelled, but if it had, then that discussion would have progressed to the Consensus Track (CT), the place where official Wookieepedia votes take place. Trak suggested, half-joking and half-serious, that she might make a stop-motion animation starring her favorite character, [Zuckuss](http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Zuckuss) (she thought he was cuddly), in which he talked about how ridiculous the situation was. I wrote this as the theme song, sung to [Linkara's theme song](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=poI5dBNien0) because she was a fan of his. I lost gas during the second stanza because of a combination of running out of rhymes and not thinking the joke would be any funnier if I continued further. Anyway, I sent the first stanza to her over IRC and she loved it.*

*I sometimes miss those occasional times when Wookieepedia was fun.* (2019-01-10)

-----

(2012-09-09)
```
Welcome to the Detours CT!
Where all canon's off.
Our Zuck is gonna make you see
why this show makes him cough.
Seth Green - That's not stop motion.
Leia's - a /politicion/.
Anyone who's read a forum thread on Waru
It's something like that.
HE'S ZUCKUSS  
He is a Gand!!  
*punch*  
He wears a purdy mask.  
HE'S ZUCKUSS  
He has a snare rifle. (Mist Hunter?)  
Where'd he purchase that?  
HE'S ZUCKUSS  
Droids, bounties, Planet Gand, and hugs.  
HE'S ZUCKUSS  
THIS. CANON. SUCKS.  
[[HE'S ZUCKUSS]]  

Our Zuckuss takes time nonetheless,  
And tells us all to skip it;  
A logistical nightmare show,  
((But someone's gotta have it.))  
we've no choice but to shunt it.  
So before the show's even aired  
We must stop it  
To not bloat articles!  
And if we split,  
well, then what's the point?  
It's not like they're gonna think to type "(Detours)."
```
