# Reflection on Epona Schweer

*I found this on my parents' computer. I started at the University of Washington, Tacoma about two weeks later. On January 6, 2014, if I remember right. I'm not sure why I can remember that day exactly, but I do remember that it stuck in my memory immediately. But, as for this... I graduated from high school in June 2012. I needed one more quarter in order to graduate from community college because I didn't budget the credits in a way that would let me get my high school diploma and associate's degree at the same time. I remember my dad being pretty mad about that, but whatever. The point is that for all of 2013, I was living with my parents and I had no job lined up. I taught myself the basics of how to program in C++ and Python over that year and tried to find that mythical entry-level programming job as a self-taught developer, but it did not materialize. At that point, my dream was still to do game programming, so I had been practicing design and trying to build simple games, and I wasn't prepared to let myself realize that I just didn't like doing game programming that much yet. I wasn't prepared for how the software engineering industry would chew me up and spit me out, either. Towards the end of 2013, the first of what has become several periods of my life that feel wasted as essentially a NEET, I started trying to write responses to articles that I had read online, as an exercise in creating content (9_9) and solidifying my knowledge. (OK, that's better.) This is one such exercise, and reading it back put me right back into the chair in the office of my parents' house, where I taught myself to code and was just figuring stuff out and having some fun. I had so much hope then. It was an awkward hope that wasn't sure how I was going to get anywhere, but it was a determined hope that only someone who hasn't been disillusioned yet can have. Tears started welling up when I read this back just now, but I'm so habitually resistant to crying that they didn't actually come. I'm pretty sure I only ended up writing a handful of these things, but again, I started university soon afterward, so I would have had other concerns than solidifying this reflection as a habit.*

*The timeboxing frame of this just makes me feel like someone should have noticed that I had executive function problems way earlier than I did, and acted on that hunch then. But my parents don't believe in mental health issues, so that was not in the cards. I seriously thought that pushing through with willpower would be enough to overcome the issue, which turned out to be devastatingly wrong. And, as of now, I still need to pursue a diagnosis of some kind...*

*I kinda remember being into Epona Schweer's blog for a minute, but I think she had already stopped writing it by the time I started reading it. It seems like she doesn't own the domain name anymore. If she has a digital presence somewhere now, I couldn't find it from quick searching. She even deleted her Twitter at some point. So, I linked to Internet Archive snapshots.* (2020-11-10, after copying from file)

----------

[http://indiebits.com/listen-to-lizard-brain/](https://web.archive.org/web/20130419235059/http://indiebits.com/listen-to-lizard-brain/) 

[http://indiebits.com/the-secret-to-lasting-business-success/](https://web.archive.org/web/20150316065454/http://indiebits.com/the-secret-to-lasting-business-success/)

[http://indiebits.com/overcoming-anxiety/](https://web.archive.org/web/20130426063356/http://indiebits.com/overcoming-anxiety/)

Epona Schweer

Alright, it’s 3:30 AM and I want to get this done before 4, so let’s get down to business.

These articles on indieBits are all about actualizing your dreams in some fashion. They emphasize that the road to success is a long one and that you just have to keep working at it and getting better all the time. You have to at least show up and sit down for 10 minutes every day, no matter what. You may find that after you’ve started that you want to work longer. This goes for times when you feel like and times when you don’t. JUST STEP UP TO THE PLATE.

That’s the key to succeeding in any longterm work, and if you can’t drum up the willpower to come to the table for 10 minutes a day WHY ARE YOU DOING IT? I’ve actually been contemplating this and having a bit of an existential crisis. Game Programming is what I’ve wanted to do since I was sitting in front of a TV with a dial on it playing with a NES and a SNES. I didn’t even know what the hell a Nintendo 64 was; I sometimes wonder if I even grasped that games would be in 3D all the way back then. I’ve wondered if clinging to this dream has been a little foolhardy, and my lack of focus in purusing it has been another strike against me, but still I remain resolute here. I want to program video games. Even if I don’t make any money from fulfilling this dream, I do want to be a programmer, and programming games is good practice in a lot of ways, so why not? I’ll be going to university to learn the ins and outs of data structures and algorithms, and I can apply those to different types of programming jobs if need be. But right now I’m a game programmer and it’s about time I fucking started acting like it.

One of the articles mentioned noting fear that is warning you away from doing something vital to your dream with a lack of confidence. Schweer said that that was your Lizard Brain talking, an evolutionary adaptation you need to face it, because those feelings are making you alert while you go out of your comfort zone. The way I’ve been responding to them, I’ve been putting off reading my Game Programming book and have been reading articles on Game Design online. Not necessarily actual theory, such as how to craft design documents or how to craft experience, but instead people’s feel-good (and bad) experiences in the industry. These are interesting to me, yes, but the fact remains that they are inapplicable by me because they are not generally practical. I would be damned if I had to summarize more than a few of the articles I’ve read recently, and that is unacceptable. And the cause is that there was nothing in them that I could apply, except maybe taking inspiration to work hard for short bursts of time. And I suppose that that’s what I’m doing right now, before I go to sleep, but I will keep the motivation this time. I will. For the record, it’s now 3:50.
