# Work and School Update - (y’know, this blog’s purpose)
(2015-07-08, [lethargilistic.tumblr](http://lethargilistic.tumblr.com/post/123533533196/work-and-school-update-yknow-this-blogs))

Life updates aside, I have settled in for Summer Quarter, and it seems to be going alright aside from the severe damage working on my bed has had on my sleep schedule.

My job is also doing fine, since we’re working on limiting the amount of grading I’ll have to do during labs because I’m working without an assistant this time. We didn’t have a lab last week, because of Independence Day, though, so any chance that I’ll get a handle on all my student’s names is basically out the window at this point. Which is a little sad, to be honest, but they won’t really know the difference, I don’t think. Side note: you may recall that I was a teacher for the University’s Math Science Leadership youth program last year. I went to the computer lab where my students were, because I had nowhere else to be, and found my former MSL students in the lab behind us. I even got to talk to some of them, briefly. They seemed excited to be back, learning about video game development with Microsoft Kodu this time. Can’t wait to see what they make. ^^

I’m taking three classes (again, against my plans): Database Design, Networking and Distributed Systems, and Android Programming. Each of them is tolerable, but feels kind of awkward to me in some way. 

Database Design started by having us learn about relational databases as a concept at first, and now we’ve started diving into SQL Queries, which is interesting. However, to draw a parallel to learning natural languages, I feel like we’re learning more the vocabulary of the language, but less about how to put sentences together. Every day we go over some new keyword(s), but we’re not connecting it to really practical examples. As such, I’m not entirely sure what I should be practicing. It seems this is a common issue, since the class was split during a quiz between those getting full points and those getting half points. She asked for suggestions for what she could do to serve us better, and I actually had to suggest more homework, which felt a little odd, to be honest.

My Networking and Distributed Systems class is A Term only, which means it ends in about 2 weeks. We finished talking about Chapter 1 yesterday. I understand all the foundational concepts well enough, but there are some pretty basic equations that I’m having issues with. It’s kind of abstract ways of modeling how long it takes data to be sent between nodes in a network, the sum of propagation time (physically, how long does it take for the data to go from A to B, usually at the speed of light) and transmission time (how long will the data download last). Unless I have that backward. I need to go over those more. But in 2 weeks I don’t see what else we’re going to go over that will really be worthwhile. On the bright side, I learned how to write a basic server-client program, which was interesting at least.

Android Programming fell to the wayside a bit at the start, since I was focused on working out moving arrangements over reading the book. Now that I’ve got more solidified plans and room to breathe again, I’ve been learning to hate mobile apps. Working with the APIs is a pain and a half. Google updates them all the time to push the phones further and further, deprecating parts of the API left and right, making it hard to find really up-to-date resources. I’m using Android Studio (IntelliJ IDEs suck and I have no idea what the appeal is supposed to be), which is maintained by Google itself and the *sample templates are out of date.* Very frustrating. On top of that, the whole XML system so finicky, with different features having similar or abstruse names. It’s one of those things where I’ll work on getting past a gotcha on something simple like getting a button to do something, then do what I think is exactly the same thing in another app and it won’t work. But I have a good partner for the group work, who is really getting everything since it’s his only class, so that’ll be fine. I spent last weekend really catching up on all the basics.
